https://www.ourcommons.ca/Content/House/451/Debates/002/HAN002-E.PDF
45th PARLIAMENT, 1st SESSION
House of Commons Debates
Official Report
(Hansard)
Volume 152 No. 002
Tuesday, May 27, 2025
Speaker: The Honourable Francis Scarpaleggia
CONTENTS
(Table of Contents appears at back of this issue.)
11
HOUSE OF COMMONS
Tuesday, May 27, 2025
The House met at 10 a.m.
Prayer
● (1005)
[English]
A message was delivered by the Usher of the Black Rod as fol‐
lows:
Mr. Speaker, it is the pleasure of His Majesty the King of Canada that this hon‐
ourable House attend him immediately in the chamber of the Senate.
Accordingly, the Speaker with the House went up to the Senate
chamber:
And the House being returned to the Commons chamber:
The Speaker: I have the honour to report that, the House having
attended on His Majesty the King in the Senate chamber, I in‐
formed His Majesty that the choice of Speaker had fallen upon me,
and in your names and on your behalf, I made the usual claim for
your privileges, which His Majesty was pleased to confirm to you.
* * *
● (1245)
OATHS OF OFFICE
Right Hon. Mark Carney (Prime Minister, Lib.) moved for
leave to introduce Bill C-1, An Act respecting the administration of
oaths of office.
(Motions deemed adopted, bill read the first time and printed)
* * *
SPEECH FROM THE THRONE
The Speaker: I have the honour to inform the House that when
the House of Commons did attend His Majesty the King this day in
the Senate chamber, His Majesty was pleased to make a speech to
both Houses of Parliament. To prevent mistakes, I have obtained a
copy, which is as follows:
Honourable Senators,
Members of the House of Commons,
It is with a sense of deep pride and pleasure that my wife and I
join you here today, as we witness Canadians coming together in a
renewed sense of national pride, unity, and hope.
I would like to acknowledge that we are gathered on the unceded
territory of the Algonquin Anishinaabeg people. This land ac‐
knowledgement is a recognition of shared history as a nation.
While continuing to deepen my own understanding, it is my great
hope that in each of your communities, and collectively as a coun‐
try, a path is found toward truth and reconciliation, in both word
and deed.
This is my 20th visit to Canada, spread over the course of more
than half a century, and my first as Sovereign. As I have said be‐
fore, “Every time I come to Canada… a little more of Canada seeps
into my bloodstream – and from there straight to my heart.” I have
always had the greatest admiration for Canada’s unique identity,
which is recognized across the world for bravery and sacrifice in
defence of national values, and for the diversity and kindness of
Canadians.
To the First Nations, Inuit, and Métis Peoples – you have wel‐
comed my family and myself to your traditional lands with great
warmth and hospitality, for which I am humbly grateful.
This year, we mark the 80th anniversary of V-E Day and V-J
Day. On Juno Beach, at Dieppe, on the Somme, at BeaumontHamel, at Ypres, and on Vimy Ridge… At those places, and many
others, forever etched into our memories, Canadians fought and
died alongside our closest allies.
Today, I see representatives from every part of Canada – from St.
John’s, Newfoundland and Labrador, to Victoria, British Columbia,
and Arviat, Nunavut. I see the guardians of the fundamental rights
and freedoms guaranteed in the Canadian Charter and, as King, I
thank you for your service to your fellow Canadians, across the
length and breadth of this vast and great nation.
You speak for your communities, representing an incredible rich‐
ness of cultures, languages, and perspectives. We owe it to this gen‐
eration, and those who succeed us, to think and act for the greater
good of all. While the world faces unprecedented challenges, gen‐
erating uncertainties across the continents with regards to peace and
stability, economics, and climate change, your communities have
the skills and determination to bring a wealth of solutions.
By fostering collaboration and engaging in respectful, construc‐
tive debates, you will ensure this Government is capable of bold
and fair action to support Canadians.
12 COMMONS DEBATES May 27, 2025
It has been nearly 70 years since the Sovereign first opened Par‐
liament. In the time since, Canada has dramatically changed: repa‐
triating its Constitution, achieving full independence, and witness‐
ing immense growth. Canada has embraced its British, French, and
Indigenous roots, and become a bold, ambitious, innovative country
that is bilingual, truly multicultural, and committed to reconcilia‐
tion.
The Crown has for so long been a symbol of unity for Canada. It
also represents stability and continuity from the past to the present.
As it should, it stands proudly as a symbol of Canada today, in all
her richness and dynamism.
Opening
When my dear late mother, Queen Elizabeth II, opened a new
Canadian Parliament in 1957, the Second World War remained a
fresh, painful memory. The Cold War was intensifying. Freedom
and democracy were under threat. Canada was emerging as a grow‐
ing economic power and a force for peace in the world. In the
decades since, history has been punctuated by epoch-making
events: the Vietnam War, the fall of the Berlin Wall, and the start of
the War on Terror. Today, Canada faces another critical moment.
Democracy, pluralism, the rule of law, self-determination, and free‐
dom are values which Canadians hold dear, and ones which the
Government is determined to protect.
The system of open global trade that, while not perfect, has
helped to deliver prosperity for Canadians for decades, is changing.
Canada’s relationships with partners are also changing.
We must be clear-eyed: the world is a more dangerous and uncer‐
tain place than at any point since the Second World War. Canada is
facing challenges that are unprecedented in our lifetimes.
Many Canadians are feeling anxious and worried about the dras‐
tically changing world around them. Fundamental change is always
unsettling. Yet this moment is also an incredible opportunity. An
opportunity for renewal. An opportunity to think big and to act big‐
ger. An opportunity for Canada to embark on the largest transfor‐
mation of its economy since the Second World War. A confident
Canada, which has welcomed new Canadians, including from some
of the most tragic global conflict zones, can seize this opportunity
by recognising that all Canadians can give themselves far more
than any foreign power on any continent can ever take away. And
that by staying true to Canadian values, Canada can build new al‐
liances and a new economy that serves all Canadians.
Building new relationships with the United States and the
world
The Prime Minister and the President of the United States, for
example, have begun defining a new economic and security rela‐
tionship between Canada and the U.S., rooted in mutual respect and
founded on common interests, to deliver transformational benefits
for both sovereign nations.
In parallel, the Government is working to strengthen its relation‐
ships with reliable trading partners and allies around the world, rec‐
ognizing that Canada has what the world needs and the values the
world respects.
Canada is ready to build a coalition of like-minded countries that
share its values, that believe in international co-operation and the
free and open exchange of goods, services, and ideas. In this new,
fast-evolving world, Canada is ready to lead. This will be demon‐
strated in June, when Canada convenes the G7 Summit.
Building a more affordable Canada
The Government is guided by its conviction that the economy is
only truly strong when it serves everyone. Many Canadians are
struggling to get ahead. The Government is responding, reducing
middle-class taxes and saving two-income families up to $840 a
year. It will cut the GST on homes at or under $1 million for firsttime homebuyers, delivering savings of up to $50,000. And it will
lower the GST on homes between $1 million and $1.5 million.
The Government will protect the programs that are already sav‐
ing families thousands of dollars every year. These include child
care and pharmacare. In addition to these, the Government has re‐
cently expanded the Canadian Dental Care Plan to cover about
eight million Canadians, saving the average person more than $800
per year.
Building a stronger Canada
The Government’s overarching goal – its core mission – is to
build the strongest economy in the G7. That starts with creating one
Canadian economy out of thirteen. Internal barriers to trade and
labour mobility cost Canada as much as $200 billion each year. The
Government will introduce legislation to remove all remaining fed‐
eral barriers to internal trade and labour mobility by Canada Day.
Numerous premiers have already taken vital steps to break down
provincial and territorial barriers to trade. Together, we will build
on that progress to deliver free trade across the nation by Canada
Day. This is critical to unlocking Canada’s full economic potential,
but it’s not enough.
To build Canada strong, the Government is working closely with
provinces, territories, and Indigenous Peoples to identify and catal‐
yse projects of national significance. Projects that will connect
Canada, that will deepen Canada’s ties with the world, and that will
create high-paying jobs for generations.
May 27, 2025 COMMONS DEBATES 13
Given the pace of change and the scale of opportunities, speed is
of the essence. Through the creation of a new Major Federal Project
Office, the time needed to approve a project will be reduced from
five years to two; all while upholding Canada’s world-leading envi‐
ronmental standards and its constitutional obligations to Indigenous
Peoples.
The Government will also strike co-operation agreements with
every interested province and territory within six months to realize
its goal of “one project, one review.”
When Canadians come together, Canada builds things that last.
By removing these barriers that have held back our economy, we
will unleash a new era of growth that will ensure we don’t just sur‐
vive ongoing trade wars, but emerge from them stronger than ever.
It will enable Canada to become the world’s leading energy super‐
power in both clean and conventional energy. To build an industrial
strategy that will make Canada more globally competitive, while
fighting climate change. To build hundreds of thousands of good
careers in the skilled trades. And to build Canada into the world’s
leading hub for science and innovation.
Critically, the Government will undertake a series of measures to
help double the rate of home building while creating an entirely
new housing industry – using Canadian technology, Canadian
skilled workers, and Canadian lumber. The Government will intro‐
duce measures to deliver affordable homes by creating Build
Canada Homes. This mission-driven organization will act to accel‐
erate the development of new affordable housing. It will invest in
the growth of the prefabricated and modular housing industry. And
it will provide significant financing to affordable home builders.
The Government will make the housing market work better, includ‐
ing by cutting municipal development charges in half for all multiunit housing. The Government will drive supply up to bring hous‐
ing costs down.
Building a safer and more secure Canada
To be truly strong, Canada must be secure. To that end, the Gov‐
ernment will introduce legislation to enhance security at Canada’s
borders. Law enforcement and intelligence agencies will have new
tools to stop the flow of fentanyl and its precursors. The Canada
Border Services Agency will be given new powers to examine
goods destined for export, to prevent the transport of illegal and
stolen products, including cars.
The Government will protect Canada’s sovereignty by rebuild‐
ing, rearming, and reinvesting in the Canadian Armed Forces. It
will boost Canada’s defence industry by joining ReArm Europe, to
invest in transatlantic security with Canada’s European partners.
And it will invest to strengthen its presence in the North, which is
an integral part of Canada, as this region faces new threats.
The Government will discharge its duty to protect Canadians and
their sovereign rights, from wherever challenges may come at home
or abroad. To keep communities safe, the Government will hire
1,000 more RCMP personnel. It will change firearms licensing and
strengthen enforcement of yellow and red flag laws. Weapons li‐
cences for those convicted of intimate partner violence and those
subject to protection orders will be revoked. Through the deploy‐
ment of scanners, drones and helicopters, additional personnel, and
K-9 teams, the Government will stem the tide of illegal guns and
drugs across the border.
It will take these steps while protecting the rights of law-abiding
gun owners and Indigenous Peoples’ longstanding hunting tradi‐
tions.
The Government will bring a renewed focus on car theft and
home invasions by toughening the Criminal Code to make bail
harder to get for repeat offenders charged with committing these
crimes, along with human trafficking and drug smuggling.
Building a united Canada
During this time of great change, Canadians are uniting behind
what makes Canada unique.
The French language and the Quebec culture are at the heart of
the Canadian identity. They define the country that Canadians and I
love so much. Canada is a country that respects and celebrates its
official languages and Indigenous languages. The Government is
determined to protect the institutions that bring these cultures and
this identity to the world, like CBC/Radio-Canada. It will protect
the people who give us access to fresh, healthy, and quality food:
agricultural producers. And it will protect supply management.
Nature is core to Canada’s identity. In 2022, Canada convened
COP15 in Montréal, which concluded with 196 countries striking a
historic agreement to protect 30 percent of their lands and 30 per‐
cent of waters by 2030. To this end, the Government will protect
more of Canada’s nature than ever before through the creation of
new national parks, national urban parks, marine protected areas,
and other conservation initiatives.
The Government will always protect the rights and freedoms that
the Charter guarantees for every Canadian.
14 COMMONS DEBATES May 27, 2025
The Government will be a reliable partner to Indigenous Peoples,
upholding its fundamental commitment to advancing reconciliation.
Central to this commitment is the creation of long-term wealth and
prosperity with Indigenous Peoples. For that reason, the Govern‐
ment will double the Indigenous Loan Guarantee Program
from $5 billion to $10 billion – enabling more Indigenous commu‐
nities to become owners of major projects. As Canada moves for‐
ward with nation-building projects, the Government will always be
firmly guided by the principle of free, prior, and informed consent.
Canada’s immigration system has long been a source of pride for
Canadians and of dynamism for the economy. The Government is
dedicated to rebuilding the trust of Canadians in immigration by
restoring balance to the system.
The Government will cap the total number of temporary foreign
workers and international students to less than five percent of
Canada’s population by 2027. By doing this, the Government will
attract the best talent in the world to build our economy, while
sending a clear message to Canadians working abroad that there is
no better time to come home.
Building Canada Strong by spending less and investing more
In all of its actions, the Government will be guided by a new fis‐
cal discipline: spend less so Canadians can invest more.
Day-to-day government spending – the government’s operating
budget – has been growing by nine percent every year. The Govern‐
ment will introduce measures to bring it below two percent.
Transfers to provinces, territories, or individuals will be main‐
tained. The Government will balance its operating budget over the
next three years by cutting waste, capping the public service, end‐
ing duplication, and deploying technology to improve public sector
productivity.
In parallel, the Government will take a series of measures to
catalyse new investment to create better jobs and higher incomes
for Canadians. The scale of the Government’s initiative will match
the challenges of our times and the ambitions of Canadians.
Conclusion
Honourable Senators,
Members of the House of Commons,
When my dear late mother addressed your predecessors seven
decades ago, she said that in that age, and against the backdrop of
international affairs, no nation could live unto itself. It is a source
of great pride that, in the following decades, Canada has continued
to set an example to the world in her conduct and values, as a force
for good.
I wish to express to you and to the people of Canada my heartfelt
gratitude, and that of my wife, for the warmth of the welcome
which we have received.
As the anthem reminds us: The True North is indeed strong and
free!
Members of the House of Commons, you will be asked to appro‐
priate the funds to carry out the services and expenditures autho‐
rized by Parliament.
May you honour the profound trust bestowed upon you by Cana‐
dians, and may God bless and guide you in all your duties.
Right Hon. Mark Carney (Prime Minister, Lib.): Mr. Speaker,
I understand just how exceptional that was, and I have a deep ap‐
preciation of the House. I also think it is a reflection of how excep‐
tional today is.
I move:
That the Speech of His Majesty the King, delivered this day from the Throne to
both Houses of Parliament, be taken into consideration later this day.
(Motion agreed to)
* * *
[Translation]
WAYS AND MEANS
NOTICE OF MOTION
Hon. François-Philippe Champagne (Minister of Finance and
National Revenue, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, I would like to begin by
congratulating you on your election.
[English]
The government is taking real action to bring down costs for
Canadians. Therefore, pursuant to Standing Order 83(1), I would
like to table, in both official languages, a notice of ways and means
motion containing measures that will deliver real change by cutting
taxes for Canadians, bringing down costs and putting more money
in the pockets of Canadians.
Pursuant to Standing Order 83(2), I ask that the order of the day
be designated for consideration of this ways and means motion.
* * *
[Translation]
CONFLICT OF INTEREST AND ETHICS COMMISSIONER
The Speaker: Pursuant to subsection 15(3) of the Conflict of In‐
terest Code for Members of the House of Commons, it is my duty
to lay upon the table the list of all sponsored travel by members for
the year 2024, as provided by the Conflict of Interest and Ethics
Commissioner.
May 27, 2025 COMMONS DEBATES 15
The Address
[English]
BUSINESS OF SUPPLY
Hon. Shafqat Ali (President of the Treasury Board, Lib.): Mr.
Speaker, I move:
That the business of supply be considered at the next sitting of the House.
(Motion agreed to)
[Translation]
The Speaker: It is my duty to inform the House that four days in
all shall be allotted to the business of supply for the period ending
June 23.
Hon. Steven MacKinnon (Leader of the Government in the
House of Commons, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, I would also like to con‐
gratulate you on your election.
There have been discussions among the parties and if you seek it,
I believe you will find unanimous consent to adopt the following
motion:
That, notwithstanding any standing order or usual practice of the House, until
the end of the current supply period ending June 23, 2025:
(a) Standing Orders 81(4) and 81(5) be replaced with the following:
“Main estimates and any supplementary estimates shall be deemed referred to a
committee of the whole House immediately after they are presented in the
House, provided that,
(i) a minister of the Crown, after consultation with the House leaders of the
other parties, shall designate four days to consider these estimates in commit‐
tee of the whole, at the ordinary hour of daily adjournment on each day for a
period of time not exceeding four hours,
(ii) the said committee of the whole shall convene for the sole purpose of
asking questions to the government in regard to the estimates,
(iii) during the time provided for the consideration of estimates in committee
of the whole,
(A) no member shall be recognized for more than 15 minutes at a time and the
member shall not speak in debate for more than 10 minutes during that period,
(B) the 15 minutes may be used exclusively both for debate and for posing ques‐
tions to a minister of the Crown or a parliamentary secretary acting on behalf of
the minister,
(C) when a member is recognized, he or she shall indicate how the 15 minutes is
to be apportioned,
(D) members speaking during the debate may indicate to the Chair that they will
be dividing their time with one or more other members;
(E) no quorum calls, dilatory motions or requests for unanimous consent shall be
received by the Chair,
(iv) at the conclusion of the time provided for the debate, or when no member
wishes to speak, whichever comes first,
(A) on the fourth designated day, but in any case, not later than two sitting days
before the last allotted day in the current period, the estimates shall be deemed
reported back the same to the House,
(B) on the four designated days, the committee shall rise, the debate pursuant to
Standing Order 38 shall not take place, and the House shall immediately adjourn
to the next sitting day, and;
(b) Standing Order 81(14)(a) be amended by replacing the words “Twenty-four
hours' written notice shall be given of a notice to oppose any item in the esti‐
mates, provided that for the supply period ending not later than June 23, fortyeight hours' written notice shall be given of a notice to oppose any item in the
estimates” with the words “Twenty-four hours' written notice shall be given of a
notice to oppose any item in these estimates for the supply period ending not lat‐
er than June 23.”
● (1250)
The Speaker: All those opposed to the hon. minister's moving
the motion will please say nay. It is agreed.
The House has heard the terms of the motion. All those opposed
to the motion will please say nay.
(Motion agreed to)
* * *
[English]
MAIN ESTIMATES, 2025-26
A message from Her Excellency the Governor General transmit‐
ting estimates for the financial year ending March 31, 2026, was
presented by the President of the Treasury Board and read by the
Speaker to the House.
Hon. Shafqat Ali (President of the Treasury Board, Lib.): Mr.
Speaker, I have the honour to table, in both official languages, the
main estimates, 2025-26.
SPEECH FROM THE THRONE
[English]
ADDRESS IN REPLY
The House proceeded to the consideration of the speech deliv‐
ered by His Majesty the King at the opening of the session.
Corey Hogan (Calgary Confederation, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, be‐
fore I begin my remarks, I would like to acknowledge that we are
gathered on the unceded territory of the Algonquin Anishinabe peo‐
ple.
I would also like to congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, on being
elected by the members of the House yesterday. We have conferred
upon you great responsibilities as Speaker, and though I have
known you only a brief time, I am confident you will serve this Par‐
liament well.
Today is a momentous day for this country and an unforgettable
day for all of us in the chamber. I am personally honoured to rise in
the House as a newly elected member of Parliament. I would like to
thank my family for their love and support: my wife, Lori, and our
children Annelies, Ben and Sam. I ran for office in no small part
because I want them to have the opportunities Canada provided me
and then some. I also want to thank my volunteers. Without them,
none of this would have been possible.
We all went through a vibrant election campaign just a few
weeks ago. Canadians were given the chance to look at the options
the candidates for office put before them and make their choice by
casting their ballot. It is democracy at its best.
● (1255)
[Translation]
The result of this election is such that every one of us here has
been given the honour of serving our constituents. I know that we
take this privilege to heart. I congratulate all of my MP colleagues.
As this parliamentary session begins, I am committed to working
collaboratively with everyone on behalf of the people who sent us
here.
16 COMMONS DEBATES May 27, 2025
The Address
[English]
I am deeply honoured that the people of Calgary Confederation
have put their trust in me to be their representative in Parliament.
As a proud Albertan and a proud Canadian, I stand here today in
the chamber in genuine awe of the responsibilities that have been
bestowed upon me, and all of us, at this important moment. This is
a great nation, a nation of ten provinces and three territories, all
working hand in hand with first nations, Inuit and Métis people,
with whom we share our history.
We are a nation of regions from coast to coast, but we are one
nation. It is especially important, at this moment in our history, that
we remember this. No matter where we come from in this wonder‐
ful country called Canada, we are called upon to work together as a
united people. That is at the core of our government's agenda to
build a better and stronger Canada. It is also at the core of the
Speech from the Throne. Let us review some of the highlights.
We are at a critical point in our nation's history with regard to our
place in the world and the system of global trade. We are facing a
turning point that we cannot shy away from. The trading system is
changing, and we must understand that the relationship with our
trading partners is evolving. It is a turning point that requires us all
to accept what needs to be done and work together to accomplish it.
In the throne speech, our government faces that reality.
Canadians understand that, since the Second World War, our
world has never been more dangerous or unstable, but amidst this
instability, there is an incredible opportunity. Our government in‐
tends to lead a confident Canada into the largest transformation of
our economy since the Second World War. We will stay true to our
values and build new alliances to strengthen our economy. As the
throne speech reminds us all, “Canadians can give themselves far
more than any foreign power on any continent can ever take away”
from us.
As Canadians, we all know of the long-standing relationship our
country has with the United States. It dates back many generations.
We have friends there. We have family there. I am no exception. It
is a relationship of two good neighbours built on mutual respect
and a desire to strengthen each other's economies and national se‐
curity.
This year has brought a fresh perspective to that relationship, one
which has awoken the patriotism of Canadians and sharpened our
resolve to maintain our national identity. The Prime Minister has
been clear about his own resolve. He has visited the President of
the United States in Washington, D.C., and as the throne speech
notes, he and the President have begun to define “a new economic
and security relationship” between our countries. That relationship
will remain “rooted in mutual respect” and founded on our com‐
mon, yet sovereign, interests. As we move forward, we will work
towards delivering transformational benefits to both countries. As
we do this, our government is determined not to avert our attention
away from the rest of the work ahead.
Canada has much of what the world wants and needs, so our
government will be strengthening Canada's relationship with reli‐
able trading partners throughout the world. We will work towards
building a coalition of nations that believes in co-operation and is
ready to engage in the free exchange of goods, services and ideas.
Canada can lead the way, and this will become even more apparent
when we chair the G7 summit in my home province of Alberta next
month.
I would now like to turn my attention to something closer to
home. Throughout the country, many Canadians are having diffi‐
culty paying their bills. The cost of living has become unaffordable
for many people. They are struggling to keep up and to get ahead of
the daily pressures.
Our government will act to help Canadians get ahead. We will be
reducing middle-class taxes as part of our economic agenda. This is
a priority for us. Canadians can count on it.
The tax cut will put money back into the pockets of Canadian
families. It will save the average two-income family up to $840 a
year. We will cut the GST for homes at or under $1 million for firsttime homebuyers. This will deliver savings of up to $50,000. We
will also lower the GST on homes between $1 million and $1.5
million.
As we do this, we will take concrete steps to double the rate of
homebuilding in this country, using technology, skilled work and
lumber that comes from Canada itself. We will take action to ensure
the housing market works better, including cutting municipal devel‐
opment charges in half for all multi-unit housing.
The plan is clear. The government will drive the housing supply
up to bring housing costs down. The bottom line is that our govern‐
ment knows Canadians need relief, and we are supplying it.
We will ensure the future sustainability of programs that have al‐
ready saved families thousands of dollars a year. This includes
child care and pharmacare. It also encompasses the recent expan‐
sion of the Canadian dental care plan, which is now available to an‐
other 8 million Canadians, saving the average family more
than $800 per visit.
Our government has a fundamental goal with regard to the Cana‐
dian economy: It is our core mission to build the strongest economy
in the G7. As we move towards that goal, it is imperative to recog‐
nize that we must create one Canadian economy out of 13
economies. For far too long, we have been held up by internal bar‐
riers to trade and labour mobility, and these barriers cost us as
much as $200 billion per year. The throne speech made it clear that
our government will introduce legislation to remove all remaining
federal barriers to internal trade and labour mobility by Canada
Day.
May 27, 2025 COMMONS DEBATES 17
The Address
We are moving quickly because the time for action is now. We
cannot delay. The premiers of several provinces and territories have
already taken steps to remove barriers. Our government is commit‐
ted to working with all the others to continue moving in this direc‐
tion.
As we move this way, it is important that we, as Canadians, rec‐
ognize that this is a time to not only build but also build big. We
must now build major projects to further secure our national econo‐
my and create high-paying jobs that will last for generations. To as‐
sist in this, our government will create a new major federal projects
office, through which the time needed to approve projects will be
shortened from five years to two years, a goal that would make us
among the best, if not the best, in the OECD. This will be done
while upholding Canada's environmental standards and its constitu‐
tional obligation to indigenous peoples.
Removing these obstacles will put Canada in a better position to
withstand any trade war we might experience. The change will cre‐
ate jobs and make us stronger. As the throne speech says, it will en‐
able us to become a superpower in both green and conventional en‐
ergy. This is a message Canadians from all regions should hear. It is
certainly music to Albertans' ears.
The government recognizes that Canadians have legitimate con‐
cerns about the safety of their neighbourhoods and streets. We will
introduce legislation to enhance security at our borders. We will in‐
troduce new tools for our law enforcement intelligence agencies to
stop the flow of fentanyl. The criminal code will be toughened to
make bail harder to get for repeat offenders convicted of crimes
such as car theft, home invasion and human trafficking. The
Canada Border Services Agency will be given new powers to crack
down on the stolen car trade to prevent the transport of illegal prod‐
ucts.
To further protect our communities, the government will hire
1,000 more RCMP personnel. We will take action to stem gun vio‐
lence through changes to firearm licensing and through the use of
scanners, drones and helicopters to stem the flow of drugs and guns
across the border.
Earlier, I spoke of how we live in a world of uncertainty and in‐
stability. Our government has the responsibility to protect Canada's
sovereignty, and we will do that. The government will rebuild,
rearm and reinvest in the Canadian Forces. We will work with our
European allies to strengthen transatlantic security, and we will in‐
vest in the Canadian north as part of our commitment to keep the
country safe from existing and emerging threats.
● (1300)
As an Albertan and the son of a Quebecker, I am proud to live in
a country where the French language and the Quebec culture are
embodied in our very national identity. The throne speech makes
our government's values clear and respects the country's official
and aboriginal languages. Moreover, it is a commitment to protect‐
ing the institutions that are a showcase for those cultures, like CBC
or Radio-Canada.
Our government is also deeply committed to upholding funda‐
mental obligations to advancing reconciliation with indigenous
peoples. We must and we will assist in the creation of sustainable
prosperity for them. As part of that, we will increase funding for the
indigenous loan guarantees program to help more indigenous com‐
munities own major projects.
Also central to our identity is the pristine beauty of our land.
Canadians are rightly proud of their natural habitat. Our govern‐
ment will protect this distinct feature of Canada by creating new
national parks and marine protected areas.
For many decades, Canadians have taken great pride in our im‐
migration system. It has helped paint the portrait of the Canadian
mosaic while also fuelling the engine of the economy. Maintaining
public trust in the system is integral for the system itself to be
sound. Our government will take steps to build trust and restore
balance. We will place a limit on the number of temporary foreign
workers and international students while taking steps to attract the
best talent in the world to come here and join us in building our
economy.
Let me end with some remarks about the government's commit‐
ment to responsible fiscal management. Our government brings a
new approach to this matter. The throne speech notes that the gov‐
ernment's operating budget has been growing by 9% every year.
That must change. It will change. Our government will bring in
measures to reduce the growth of that budget to below 2%. More‐
over, we will set a responsible target for deficit reduction. The gov‐
ernment will balance its operating budget over the next three years
through responsible and prudent fiscal management.
Transfers to provinces, territories and Canadians themselves will
be maintained. These are the actions of a new government deter‐
mined to set concrete objectives to build Canada into a stronger and
more prosperous nation for its people. Today's throne speech pro‐
vides a road map for how we will get there. It is an ambitious agen‐
da. It is an agenda that Canadians, working together, can achieve.
I move, seconded by the hon. member for Thérèse-De Blainville,
that the following address be presented to His Majesty the King:
TO THE KING'S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY:
MOST GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN:
We, Your Majesty's most loyal and dutiful subjects, the House of Commons of
Canada, in Parliament assembled, beg leave to offer our humble thanks to Your
Majesty for the gracious Speech which Your Majesty has addressed to both Houses
of Parliament.
18 COMMONS DEBATES May 27, 2025
The Address
● (1305)
Billy Morin (Edmonton Northwest, CPC): Mr. Speaker, the
Liberals put forward a plan that includes a section on Canadian uni‐
ty but does not mention the west once. The Liberals offer empty
words on making Canada an energy superpower but provide abso‐
lutely no concrete action to spur investment and growth in our ener‐
gy sector. This is what the Prime Minister's energy minister offered
in Calgary last week: empty words, void of tangible commitments.
Let us be clear: The job losses and cancelled projects in our ener‐
gy sector are the direct result of Liberal laws and policies. Making
Canada an energy superpower begins with repealing the Liberal an‐
ti-energy laws. We must repeal Bill C-69, the no new pipelines act,
which blocks energy infrastructure; Bill C-48, the oil tanker ban,
which landlocks our energy; and the oil and gas production cap,
which will gut $20 billion from the Canadian economy and kill
54,000 jobs, many of them in my own riding.
The energy minister failed to do it, so here is the chance for the
Prime Minister to unequivocally commit to undoing the Liberal an‐
ti-energy laws. Will the Prime Minister repeal the no new pipelines
law, the oil tanker ban and the oil and gas production cap so that
Canada can build energy infrastructure and get our resources to
market?
● (1310)
Corey Hogan: Mr. Speaker, I was with the Minister of Energy
when he made that speech, and the vibe in the room was very dif‐
ferent. We ended up hearing a very positive response from people
who were looking forward to turning a page and having more pro‐
ductive conversations, something I would encourage all members
to take to heart. It is not surprising the minister got a positive re‐
sponse, given that the Liberals received the highest percentage of
votes that they have had in Calgary in generations, since 1968.
This is a new government that will bring new balances to our en‐
ergy and environment conversations, and those are needed. I will
remind the members opposite that pipelines were going down to
failure long before any of the bills they listed as possible reasons
for it. In fact, northern gateway did not manage to pass court chal‐
lenges, because the environmental reviews and the indigenous con‐
sultations were deemed too insufficient by the courts, a problem
that this side of the House has cleaned up.
[Translation]
Alexis Deschênes (Gaspésie—Les Îles-de-la-Madeleine—Lis‐
tuguj, BQ): Mr. Speaker, I want to begin by thanking the people of
Gaspésie—Les Îles-de-la-Madeleine for putting their trust in me. I
will endeavour, at every opportunity, to be worthy of them and
stand up for the interests of Quebec and its regions.
The Speech from the Throne in no way prioritizes the interests of
our regions. We have just come out of an election campaign that
was entirely focused on the importance of protecting our economy
against Donald Trump, but the Speech from the Throne makes no
mention of Quebec's forestry industry and its needs in the softwood
lumber dispute. It makes no mention of aluminum, which is one of
the sectors hit by the U.S. tariffs. It makes no mention of the fish‐
ery, an important and fragile sector whose exports rely far too heav‐
ily on the Americans.
This text was read by a British monarch and it is so disconnected
from the needs of Quebeckers that it could just as easily have been
written in London. Where are Quebec's interests in that document?
Corey Hogan: Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the hon. mem‐
ber for his question.
[English]
Canada is a nation of regions. I know this well as an Albertan. A
speech of this nature is about the nation as a whole. There is much
detail to come afterward and much discussion to have in the days to
come.
Hon. Kevin Lamoureux (Winnipeg North, Lib.): Mr. Speaker,
Canadians elected—
Some hon. members: Oh, oh!
The Speaker: This is the first test, I guess.
The hon. member for Winnipeg North.
Hon. Kevin Lamoureux: Mr. Speaker, I missed my Conserva‐
tive friends too, especially Pierre Poilievre.
Having said that, Canadians elected a new government here in
Canada. It is a government that understands the benefits of building
a strong economy and a strong nation for all Canadians. We have
seen that clearly demonstrated in the throne speech delivered by the
King of Canada earlier today.
Would my friend and colleague from Alberta not agree that one
of the most impressive initiatives the Prime Minister took on day
one was to give Canadians a tax break? Hundreds of millions of
dollars will go into the pockets of Canadians in every region of our
country.
● (1315)
Corey Hogan: Mr. Speaker, I wholeheartedly agree with my col‐
league. This is another example of a new government bringing a
new agenda, and Canadians will be well served by that government
in the weeks, months and hopefully years to come.
Carol Anstey (Long Range Mountains, CPC): Mr. Speaker, it
is an honour to rise as the first Conservative woman to ever serve
the Province of Newfoundland and Labrador in the House of Com‐
mons.
I was born and raised, laid roots and built a career in Newfound‐
land and Labrador. Unfortunately, for young people today, building
a life in Newfoundland and Labrador is becoming a distant dream.
Too many are forced to pack their bags and head elsewhere across
Canada. The blame is with the federal government, for implement‐
ing policies that block investment and kill major projects that create
jobs young people could build a life on.
May 27, 2025 COMMONS DEBATES 19
The Address
I have combed over the speech and cannot seem to find any firm
commitment for young Newfoundlanders who want to build their
lives and stay in the province. Will the Prime Minister commit to
reversing the anti-energy Liberal laws, excessive red tape regula‐
tion and high taxes that are crushing the dreams of young people in
Newfoundland and Labrador?
Corey Hogan: Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the hon.
member on her election.
From coast to coast to coast, the throne speech speaks about eco‐
nomic opportunity. It talks about the ways we are going to build
things, the ways we are going to grow things and, most importantly,
the way we are going to do it quickly, because time is not our
friend. There is a commitment within the throne speech to have a
major projects office and to move the approval of projects from five
years to two years. That would make us among the best, if not the
best, in the OECD. Therefore, I am optimistic for the future. I hope
the hon. member across the way will keep an open mind as we im‐
plement this agenda.
Jenny Kwan (Vancouver East, NDP): Mr. Speaker, I congratu‐
late my colleague on his election.
New Democrats will be here to hold the government to account,
of course, and collaborate where possible, notwithstanding that we
do not have official party status.
On the issue around housing, and we all heard it on the ground
during the election campaign, there is nothing in the throne speech
that talks about renters. There is nothing in the throne speech that
talks about building social housing and co-op housing, recognizing
it was the Liberals who cancelled the national affordable housing
program, and there are no measures in the throne speech to address
housing profiteering. Is it because the Minister of Housing is saying
that affordability is not an issue faced by Canadians?
My question for the member is this: What is he going to do to
ensure social housing and co-op housing—
Some hon. members: Oh, oh!
The Speaker: A very brief answer by the member for Calgary
Confederation.
Corey Hogan: Mr. Speaker, this is a throne speech that is heavy
on housing. It takes a land, sea and air approach to housing that re‐
duces the costs of developing and building, and increases supply
through the largest action since World War II.
* * *
FEDERAL TAX EXPENDITURES
Hon. Shafqat Ali (President of the Treasury Board, Lib.): Mr.
Speaker, pursuant to Standing Order 32(2), I have the honour to ta‐
ble, on behalf of the Minister of Finance, a document, in both offi‐
cial languages, entitled “Report on Federal Tax Expenditures” for
2025.
● (1320)
Elizabeth May: Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of order. As you
may be aware, although the hon. member for Vancouver East is
some distance from the Chair, there unfortunately has been more
heckling than one would want on the day when we receive the
Speech from the Throne.
Some hon. members: Oh, oh!
Elizabeth May: I am being heckled as I make this point, Mr.
Speaker.
In your election, there were many commitments made in this
place from many quarters that we want to see better decorum in
Parliament. On the part of my ability to understand and hear the
member who is right next to me, the heckling was too loud.
The Speaker: It is noted. I would remind all members that we
have to be able to hear what is being said.
* * *
[Translation]
ADDRESS IN REPLY
The House resumed consideration of the speech delivered by His
Majesty the King at the opening of the session.
Madeleine Chenette (Thérèse-De Blainville, Lib.): Mr. Speak‐
er, hon. colleagues, before I begin, I would like to acknowledge that
we are gathered on the unceded territory of the Algonquin Anishin‐
abe nation.
I am both humbled and excited to rise as the member for
Thérèse-De Blainville. It is an honour to be here today, on behalf of
my constituents, to deliver this speech. As I often tell my friends
and family, I do not take my good fortune for granted.
I congratulate you on your new position, Mr. Speaker, and I con‐
gratulate all members of the House. I look forward to working with
everyone.
First and foremost, I would like to express my gratitude to my
constituents for the trust they have placed in me. I thank them for
their questions, their commitment and all their suggestions. I want
to sincerely thank my husband Claude, my family, and the volun‐
teers who supported me throughout this campaign.
In my previous role as Canada's ambassador to the Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development, or OECD, I was
deeply concerned about the place of democracy in the world. I am
pleased to see our Canadian democracy so strong and healthy. All
of our conversations have been respectful. In this chamber that em‐
bodies our country's democratic values, I rise today with a deep
sense of responsibility.
20 COMMONS DEBATES May 27, 2025
The Address
As stated in the Speech from the Throne, all Canadians are expe‐
riencing major changes at this point in time. These profound
changes mean incredible opportunities for our entire country: op‐
portunities for renewal, opportunities for growth and, above all, op‐
portunities for Canada to undertake its greatest economic transfor‐
mation since the Second World War. We are going through these
changes together. They are affecting our families, our communities
and our workplaces. Yes, these changes will challenge us, but they
will also give us the impetus to build a better future. By remaining
true to its values, Canada can build new alliances and a new econo‐
my that works for all Canadians. Canada is ready to build a coali‐
tion with countries that share its values and believe in international
co-operation, as we will demonstrate a few weeks from now, when
Canada chairs the G7 summit in June.
Until recently, I served as Canada's ambassador and representa‐
tive to the OECD, the International Energy Agency, the Internation‐
al Transport Forum, the Nuclear Energy Agency, and the Global
Partnership on Artificial Intelligence. I can assure the House that
member countries are ready for this partnership with Canada. This
kind of involvement on the world stage does not detract from our
national interests. On the contrary, it is a natural extension of those
interests. We believe that in order to be strong at home, we have to
be present, respected and engaged internationally.
No discussion of change and opportunities would be complete
without considering what is going on with our neighbours in the
United States. The Prime Minister and the President of the United
States have begun defining a new economic and security relation‐
ship between our two countries, rooted in mutual respect and
founded on the common interests of our two sovereign nations.
This renewed partnership with our neighbour to the south offers us
an opportunity to write a new chapter in our history of collabora‐
tion, mutual growth and shared prosperity. At the same time, our
government is strengthening ties with our trading partners and al‐
lies. We already have 50 free trade agreements. Now more than ev‐
er, we need to put them to good use. Today, our economic future
hinges on our ability to build strong, lasting strategic ties around
the world.
The people of my riding made it abundantly clear to me that they
believe the economy is only truly strong when it serves everyone
and is consistent with what all Canadians want. That is why we are
reducing middle-class taxes, saving two-income families up
to $840 a year. We will also be reducing the GST on homes at or
under $1 million for first-time homebuyers, which will save them
up to $50,000. Our constituents want concrete action. These mea‐
sures are concrete. They will have a direct impact on the lives of
Canadians and Canadian families by improving both access and se‐
curity.
● (1325)
Furthermore, we will protect the programs that are already help‐
ing Canadians save thousands of dollars a year, such as the child
care program, pharmacare and more. What we heard from our con‐
stituents as we went door to door is that our social programs must
be maintained because they have a real impact on Canadians' ev‐
eryday lives. These programs enable many people to access essen‐
tial services, and that is something we will never jeopardize.
Everyone knows, because we said it very clearly during the re‐
cent campaign, that our government's main goal is to build the
strongest economy in the G7. That starts with creating one Canadi‐
an economy. It is an ambitious and critical plan. It is time to break
down silos, overcome internal barriers, and build a true economic
union among our provinces and territories. The OECD, the Organi‐
sation for Economic Co-operation and Development, has been rec‐
ommending this for years in its economic reports. Now there is a
sense of urgency that is driving us to act. Internal barriers to trade
and labour mobility cost Canada as much as $200 billion each year.
That is unacceptable, and so we will be introducing legislation to
remove all federal barriers to internal trade and labour mobility by
Canada Day. Numerous premiers have already taken vital steps to
break down provincial and territorial barriers to trade, and we will
build on that progress to create a strong economy for the whole
country. Working with provincial and territorial premiers is the key
to success, and everyone in the House has a role to play in this joint
effort so that we can reach our full economic potential.
However, that is not all. A lot more needs to be done to reach our
full potential and build Canada strong. This cannot happen without
a strong commitment to collaboration. For that, we will need to
work closely with provinces, territories and indigenous peoples to
implement projects of national significance. Throughout my career,
I have worked with the business community, unions, civil society,
as well as diplomats and governments around the world. Now more
than ever, our Canadian pride must deepen our ties with the world
to create high-paying jobs for Canadians. We know that these
projects require leadership, but also a listening ear, flexibility and
respect for jurisdictions. More importantly, this plan to build
Canada strong resonates with our constituents.
Given the scale of opportunities before us, speed is of the
essence. The new major federal project office will reduce the time
needed to approve a project from five years to two, all while up‐
holding Canada's world-leading environmental standards and its
constitutional obligations to indigenous peoples. This will enable us
to strike a balance between efficiency and accountability. Our gov‐
ernment will also strike co-operation agreements with every inter‐
ested province and territory within six months to realize its goal of
“one project, one review”. By removing these barriers holding back
the Canadian economy, we will unleash a new era of growth in
Canada that will ensure we do not just survive trade wars, but
emerge from them as a stronger sovereign nation.
May 27, 2025 COMMONS DEBATES 21
The Address
It is that resilience, that ability to turn adversity into opportunity,
that has always characterized our country. During the election cam‐
paign, I heard from my constituents that housing was a top priority
for them, as it is for all Canadians. Their message is very clear. Ma‐
jor changes are needed; concrete action must be taken, and quickly.
That is why our government will undertake a series of measures to
help double the rate of home building while creating an entirely
new housing industry using Canadian technology, Canadian skilled
workers and Canadian lumber. We must also be ready to innovate
so that we can meet our climate challenges. We have the resources,
we have the know-how and we have the will. It is time for action.
● (1330)
Our government will also introduce measures to deliver afford‐
able homes by creating a mission-driven organization called build
Canada homes, which will accelerate the development of new af‐
fordable housing, invest in the growth of the prefabricated and
modular housing industry, and provide significant financing to af‐
fordable home builders.
Our constituents want concrete actions like these. Together with
all stakeholders and regional parties involved, we will innovate and
overcome challenges.
In recent months, we have also heard a lot of talk about Canada's
security, especially at our borders. To that end, our government will
introduce legislation to enhance security at Canada's borders. A
strong country must be able to protect its borders, its citizens and
its territorial integrity. New tools to stop the flow of fentanyl and its
precursors will also be introduced. The Canada Border Services
Agency will be given new powers to examine goods destined for
export in order to prevent the transport of illegal and stolen prod‐
ucts, including cars, which we all know has become a serious prob‐
lem.
We will not stop there. Our government will protect Canada's
sovereignty by rebuilding, rearming and reinvesting in the Canadi‐
an Armed Forces and will strengthen Canada's presence in the
north. We will also join ReArm Europe to invest in transatlantic se‐
curity.
Security also means solidarity. Ensuring that our borders are se‐
cure is one thing, but we cannot ignore the safety of our communi‐
ties. Our communities are where we live, where our loved ones
live, our children and our parents. We must ensure that they are safe
places for everyone, at all times. To that end, we will hire 1,000
more RCMP personnel and make changes to firearms licensing. We
are going to take car theft and home invasions very seriously, and
we are going to toughen the Criminal Code to make bail harder to
get for repeat offenders charged with committing these crimes,
along with human trafficking and drug smuggling. The safety of
our communities is non-negotiable.
Now I want to turn to something that is ingrained in me, some‐
thing essential for building a strong Canada. I have said this many
times to the constituents of Thérèse‑De Blainville: I am a proud
Quebecker and a proud francophone. At the same time, I am a
proud Canadian. The French language and Quebec culture are both
at the heart of the Canadian identity. They define the country that
Canadians and I love so much. I have promoted our country
throughout my career, right across Canada and internationally. That
is the kind of leadership we all need to show every day. Protecting
our language, our traditions and our heritage is essential. It is also
an incredible asset in our international trade. I know what I am talk‐
ing about.
Canada is a country that respects and celebrates its official lan‐
guages and indigenous languages. The government is determined to
protect the institutions that bring these cultures and this identity to
the world, like CBC/Radio‑Canada, and programs that really make
a difference, such as the indigenous loan guarantee program, which
will double from $5 billion to $10 billion. Our government will be
a reliable partner to indigenous peoples, upholding its fundamental
commitment to advancing reconciliation. We will meet that com‐
mitment with conviction.
We are also committed to protecting our farmers, who provide us
with fresh, healthy, high-quality food. Protecting supply manage‐
ment is very important. Our food sovereignty is an essential com‐
ponent of our national sovereignty.
Canada's immigration system has also long been a source of
pride for Canadians. That is why we are committed to rebuilding
Canadians' trust in immigration by restoring balance to the system.
● (1335)
This responsibility will demand both structure and compassion.
With that in mind, our government will cap the number of tem‐
porary foreign workers and international students allowed to come
to Canada. We will attract the best talent from around the world to
build the Canadian economy.
In all of its actions, our government will be guided by a new fis‐
cal discipline, one that involves spending less so that Canadians can
invest more. This is also something the people of Thérèse-De
Blainville have been calling for. We believe that every public dollar
should be spent wisely in the collective interest. Our government
will work hard to achieve this.
Our government will balance its operating budget over the next
three years by cutting waste, capping the public service, ending du‐
plication and deploying technology to improve public sector pro‐
ductivity. In parallel, we will take a series of measures to catalyze
new investments and create better jobs and higher incomes for
Canadians.
The scale of this government's initiative will match the chal‐
lenges of our times and the ambitions of Canadians.
I want to close by telling my esteemed colleagues that we, as
Canadians, are strong and free, and that we will do everything we
can over the course of this mandate entrusted to us to make this
great country even stronger. Doing so will require more than just
programs and policies. It will require a commitment to moving our
country forward despite the challenges ahead.
22 COMMONS DEBATES May 27, 2025
The Address
Canada has tremendous assets and economic leverage: our tal‐
ents and ability to innovate, the private sector's expertise combined
with the public sector's, our rich multicultural mosaic and our
strength when it comes to inclusion and global partnerships.
Canada is also brimming with hope and opportunity. By working
together with the provinces and territories, indigenous peoples and
all stakeholders, we can build a strong future for all Canadians, a
future where our shared values continue to be a priority.
Gabriel Hardy (Montmorency—Charlevoix, CPC): Mr.
Speaker, I would like to begin by thanking the citizens of Mont‐
morency—Charlevoix for placing their trust in the Conservative
Party and in me for this 45th Parliament. I will meet this challenge
with respect, as well as with profound dedication.
The government's Speech from the Throne is a nearly 30-page
document that is supposed to define the priorities of the Canadian
government, yet it contains but one mention of the French language
and Quebec culture. There is only one reference, nothing more.
There were no major commitments whatsoever.
Meanwhile, the decline of French throughout the province of
Quebec and across the country is very real. It is picking up speed in
the workplace. It is disappearing from government offices. Franco‐
phone civil servants are telling us how difficult it is for them to ex‐
press themselves in French.
Despite this brief mention in the Speech from the Throne, there
are no concrete measures to ensure that French will be protected in
Canada. The town of Château-Richer, in my riding, was home to
the first French colony. It led to the creation of the Canada we
know today.
Let me be clear: The Conservatives believe in the French lan‐
guage. We have advocated for it for a long time. We want to pro‐
mote it, and we want to protect it.
When the Prime Minister met with Donald Trump in the Oval
Office, what guarantees did he get that our French language will
never be on the table, not now and not ever? Did he merely talk
about it?
● (1340)
Madeleine Chenette: Mr. Speaker, for starters, members need to
stop scaring our fellow Quebeckers and French Canadians with re‐
spect to our ability to maintain our language.
I have said it before and I will say it again: Our leaders are taking
action. Our government has plenty of francophone leaders and lead‐
ers who share their pride in our French language. We are going to
speak it.
I want to reiterate that we are all committed to promoting the
French language across our beautiful country.
Patrick Bonin (Repentigny, BQ): Mr. Speaker, I would like to
take this opportunity, my first time rising to speak, to thank the peo‐
ple of Repentigny who put their trust in me. I will not compromise
when it comes to protecting their interests and the interests of Que‐
bec.
The throne speech confirms that Ottawa wants to replace its en‐
vironmental assessment process with an oil and gas project fasttracking office. It confirmed its intention to make Canada a conven‐
tional energy superpower, in other words, a fossil fuel superpower.
It talks about respecting Canada's environmental standards without
saying a word about respecting Quebec's environmental standards,
particularly in land use planning.
In short, the throne speech seems to allow the possibility of forc‐
ing Quebec to accept pipelines. Now is not the time to build new
pipelines, however. This is not simply our opinion. The new Minis‐
ter of Canadian Identity and Culture said so himself on May 14.
Furthermore, now is not the time to end federal carbon pricing, as
the government did in its very first ways and means notice, tabled
today. Again, these are not our words. They are the words of the
OECD, the organization to which the member was formerly posted
as Canada's ambassador before she entered politics.
Does the member agree with her ministerial colleague and the
OECD that now is not the time to build new pipelines or undermine
carbon pricing?
Madeleine Chenette: Mr. Speaker, yes, I worked at the OECD
and at the International Energy Agency.
I will say that Dr. Fatih Birol, the IEA's executive director, has
repeatedly stated in international forums that Canada has every‐
thing it needs to succeed by combining all of its energy sources. He
has also repeatedly stated that the energy transition is important. I
have heard him say that a number of times, and the Prime Minister
has been very clear about his objectives. Our government wants to
build and turn Canada into a “superpower in both clean and con‐
ventional energy” while reducing our greenhouse gas emissions.
Let us stop focusing on just one part of the conversation. Energy
means the full range of energy sources Canada is blessed with.
● (1345)
Hon. Mona Fortier (Ottawa—Vanier—Gloucester, Lib.): Mr.
Speaker, congratulations on your new mandate.
I want to take this opportunity to thank the people of Ottawa—
Vanier—Gloucester for putting their trust in me. I will work very
hard these next few years.
Over the past few weeks, Canadians across the country and in the
riding of Ottawa—Vanier—Gloucester that I represent sent a clear
message. We need to be united, sovereign and responsible. We need
to protect and create new jobs and new careers to make Canada
more competitive and innovative. We need to create a single econo‐
my, not 13, if we want to build a stronger G7 economy.
Can the member for Thérèse-De Blainville elaborate on the mea‐
sures we will be taking to improve the quality of life of Canadians?
Madeleine Chenette: Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank my es‐
teemed colleague for that question.
May 27, 2025 COMMONS DEBATES 23
The Address
I will simply say that we have an economic framework for man‐
aging quality of life in Canada that will help build our economy.
That framework encompasses housing, transportation and the envi‐
ronment. I am not going to go into detail, since it is all written
down. In doing so, we will all work together to ensure that this
economy delivers results for every region.
[English]
Kathy Borrelli (Windsor—Tecumseh—Lakeshore, CPC): Mr.
Speaker, I am honoured to stand in the House on behalf of the peo‐
ple of Windsor—Tecumseh—Lakeshore.
Windsor workers are rightly worried. They are worried about
threats from the United States toward their jobs. They are worried
about their shifts being cut. They are worried about paying their
mortgage and putting food on the table. In Windsor, we can literally
see the car manufacturers and industries across the river in Detroit,
Michigan. American workers at these plants do not need to worry
about a costly, job-killing carbon tax. They know that their jobs are
more secure without an industrial carbon tax. That is not the case
on this side of the border. The Liberal government is making our
industry and our manufacturers less competitive by keeping in
place the costly industrial carbon tax.
We need to work together and do everything we can to protect
our jobs. By keeping the industrial carbon tax on steel, aluminum
and other manufacturing, the government is forcing our workers to
fight with one elbow tied behind their back. Will the government
unshackle our workers and cancel the whole carbon tax on every‐
thing for everyone?
[Translation]
Madeleine Chenette: Mr. Speaker, my hon. colleague did a
good job summarizing the issues and concerns of Canadians and
business owners. I would like to add that the current context is not
necessarily like a boxing match or hockey game. It is more like tai
chi, which I have been practising for 30 years now. In tai chi, we
use each other's energy to move forward.
I would say that, yes, the economy will be the priority. As for in‐
dustrial carbon pricing, it generates billions of dollars in invest‐
ments and creates tens of thousands of jobs across Canada. It is
three times more effective than consumer carbon pricing.
I will end by saying that we need to take the right measures to
ensure our economic growth while, of course, protecting our envi‐
ronment.
● (1350)
[English]
Hon. Andrew Scheer (Leader of the Opposition, CPC): Mr.
Speaker, as members know, it is the convention here that we not be
terribly critical of His Majesty's speech while he is still in the na‐
tional capital. There will be lots to say tomorrow about the defi‐
ciencies, the lack of details and the lack of a plan to implement any‐
thing that was in there, but I would be remiss if I did not point out
just a few things. I will elaborate more tomorrow, so I expect all
members to be here for that.
It is not good enough to say what one intends to do; they have to
provide some kind of a road map to get there. The Prime Minister
has set the bar extremely high. He will not be able to get the benefit
of the doubt that Justin Trudeau had when he first started in this
place, after his background. He has promised Canadians that he will
resolve the challenges facing Canadians, and yet—
Some hon. members: Oh, oh!
Hon. Andrew Scheer: No, members will not like what comes
next.
Mr. Speaker, in these early days, we already see that the Prime
Minister cannot get results, so he is very quickly learning how to be
a Liberal politician: Promise a lot and deliver little. That is the track
record of the government.
The only parts that were even remotely decent in the throne
speech, of course, were plagiarized from Conservative policies that
we have been fighting for, and the Liberals have been fighting
against, for a decade. However, we know that the Prime Minister is
no stranger to copying work and passing it off as his own.
Given that we are early in this Parliament and will have lots
more to say tomorrow, I move:
That the debate be now adjourned.
The Speaker: Is it the pleasure of the House to adopt the mo‐
tion?
Some hon. members: Agreed.
(Motion agreed to)
[Translation]
Hon. Steven MacKinnon (Leader of the Government in the
House of Commons, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, allow me to take a mo‐
ment to tell all my hon. colleagues that tomorrow, the House will
hold its first day of debate on the address in reply to the Speech
from the Throne. We anticipate that the six days of debate on the
address will be consecutive and that the final vote will take place
next Wednesday.
In closing, I move:
That this House do now adjourn.
[English]
The Speaker: Is it the pleasure of the House to adopt the mo‐
tion?
Some hon. members: Agreed.
(Motion agreed to)
The Speaker: The House stands adjourned until tomorrow at
2 p.m. pursuant to Standing Order 24(1).
(The House adjourned at 1:53 p.m.)
CONTENTS
Tuesday, May 27, 2025
The Speaker ............................................... 11
Oaths of Office
Carney ..................................................... 11
Bill C-1. Introduction and first reading.................... 11
(Motions deemed adopted, bill read the first time and
printed) .................................................... 11
Speech from the Throne
The Speaker ............................................... 11
Carney ..................................................... 14
Motion ..................................................... 14
(Motion agreed to)......................................... 14
Ways and Means
Notice of Motion
Champagne ................................................ 14
Conflict of Interest and Ethics Commissioner
The Speaker ............................................... 14
Business of Supply
Ali ......................................................... 15
Motion ..................................................... 15
(Motion agreed to)......................................... 15
MacKinnon ................................................ 15
Motion ..................................................... 15
(Motion agreed to)......................................... 15
Main Estimates, 2025-26
Ali ......................................................... 15
SPEECH FROM THE THRONE
Address in Reply
Hogan...................................................... 15
Motion ..................................................... 17
Morin ...................................................... 18
Deschênes ................................................. 18
Lamoureux................................................. 18
Anstey ..................................................... 18
Kwan ...................................................... 19
Federal Tax Expenditures
Ali ......................................................... 19
Address in Reply
Chenette ................................................... 19
Hardy ...................................................... 22
Bonin ...................................................... 22
Fortier...................................................... 22
Borrelli..................................................... 23
Scheer...................................................... 23
Motion ..................................................... 23
(Motion agreed to)......................................... 23
MacKinnon ................................................ 23
Motion ..................................................... 23
(Motion agreed to)......................................... 23
Published under the authority of the Speaker of
the House of Commons
Publié en conformité de l’autorité
du Président de la Chambre des communes
SPEAKER’S PERMISSION PERMISSION DU PRÉSIDENT
The proceedings of the House of Commons and its commit‐
tees are hereby made available to provide greater public ac‐
cess. The parliamentary privilege of the House of Commons
to control the publication and broadcast of the proceedings of
the House of Commons and its committees is nonetheless re‐
served. All copyrights therein are also reserved.
Les délibérations de la Chambre des communes et de ses
comités sont mises à la disposition du public pour mieux le
renseigner. La Chambre conserve néanmoins son privilège
parlementaire de contrôler la publication et la diffusion des
délibérations et elle possède tous les droits d’auteur sur
celles-ci.
Reproduction of the proceedings of the House of Commons
and its committees, in whole or in part and in any medium,
is hereby permitted provided that the reproduction is accu‐
rate and is not presented as official. This permission does not
extend to reproduction, distribution or use for commercial
purpose of financial gain. Reproduction or use outside this
permission or without authorization may be treated as copy‐
right infringement in accordance with the Copyright Act. Au‐
thorization may be obtained on written application to the Of‐
fice of the Speaker of the House of Commons.
Il est permis de reproduire les délibérations de la Chambre
et de ses comités, en tout ou en partie, sur n’importe quel sup‐
port, pourvu que la reproduction soit exacte et qu’elle ne soit
pas présentée comme version officielle. Il n’est toutefois pas
permis de reproduire, de distribuer ou d’utiliser les délibéra‐
tions à des fins commerciales visant la réalisation d'un profit
financier. Toute reproduction ou utilisation non permise ou
non formellement autorisée peut être considérée comme une
violation du droit d’auteur aux termes de la Loi sur le droit
d’auteur. Une autorisation formelle peut être obtenue sur
présentation d’une demande écrite au Bureau du Président
de la Chambre des communes.
Reproduction in accordance with this permission does not
constitute publication under the authority of the House of
Commons. The absolute privilege that applies to the proceed‐
ings of the House of Commons does not extend to these per‐
mitted reproductions. Where a reproduction includes briefs
to a committee of the House of Commons, authorization for
reproduction may be required from the authors in accor‐
dance with the Copyright Act.
La reproduction conforme à la présente permission ne con‐
stitue pas une publication sous l’autorité de la Chambre. Le
privilège absolu qui s’applique aux délibérations de la Cham‐
bre ne s’étend pas aux reproductions permises. Lorsqu’une
reproduction comprend des mémoires présentés à un comité
de la Chambre, il peut être nécessaire d’obtenir de leurs au‐
teurs l’autorisation de les reproduire, conformément à la Loi
sur le droit d’auteur.
Nothing in this permission abrogates or derogates from the
privileges, powers, immunities and rights of the House of
Commons and its committees. For greater certainty, this per‐
mission does not affect the prohibition against impeaching or
questioning the proceedings of the House of Commons in
courts or otherwise. The House of Commons retains the right
and privilege to find users in contempt of Parliament if a re‐
production or use is not in accordance with this permission.
La présente permission ne porte pas atteinte aux privilèges,
pouvoirs, immunités et droits de la Chambre et de ses
comités. Il est entendu que cette permission ne touche pas
l’interdiction de contester ou de mettre en cause les délibéra‐
tions de la Chambre devant les tribunaux ou autrement. La
Chambre conserve le droit et le privilège de déclarer l’utilisa‐
teur coupable d’outrage au Parlement lorsque la reproduc‐
tion ou l’utilisation n’est pas conforme à la présente permis‐
sion.
Also available on the House of Commons website at the
following address: https://www.ourcommons.ca
Aussi disponible sur le site Web de la Chambre des
communes à l’adresse suivante :
https://www.noscommunes.ca