
https://www.ourcommons.ca/Content/House/441/Debates/002/HAN002-E.PDF
44th PARLIAMENT, 1st SESSION
House of Commons Debates
Official Report
(Hansard)
Volume 151 No. 002
Tuesday, November 23, 2021
Speaker: The Honourable Anthony Rota
CONTENTS
(Table of Contents appears at back of this issue.)
15
HOUSE OF COMMONS
Tuesday, November 23, 2021
The House met at 12:15 p.m.
Prayer
● (1215)
[English]
OPENING OF PARLIAMENT
A message was delivered by the Usher of the Black Rod as fol‐
lows:
Mr. Speaker, Her Excellency the Governor General desires the immediate atten‐
dance of this honourable House in the chamber of the Senate.
Accordingly, the Speaker with the House went up to the Senate
chamber:
And the House being returned to the Commons chamber:
The Speaker: I have the honour to report that, the House having
attended on Her Excellency the Governor General in the Senate
chamber, I informed Her Excellency that the choice of Speaker has
fallen on me and, in your names and on your behalf, I made the
usual claim for your privileges, which Her Excellency was pleased
to confirm to you.
* * *
● (1415)
[Translation]
ORDER PAPER
The Speaker: I wish to inform the House that in accordance
with the representation made by the government, pursuant to Stand‐
ing Order 55(1), I have caused to be published a special Order Pa‐
per giving notice of a government bill and a government motion.
● (1420)
[English]
I therefore table the document in question.
* * *
OATHS OF OFFICE
Right Hon. Justin Trudeau (Prime Minister, Lib.) moved for
leave to introduce Bill C-1, An Act respecting the administration of
oaths of office.
(Motions deemed adopted and bill read the first time)
SPEECH FROM THE THRONE
The Speaker: I have the honour to inform the House that when
this House did attend Her Excellency this day in the Senate cham‐
ber, Her Excellency was pleased to make a speech to both Houses
of Parliament. To prevent mistakes, I have obtained a copy, which
is as follows:
[The Governor General spoke in Inuktitut as follows:]
ᐅᓪᓗᖃᑦᓯᐊᕆᑦᓯ.
[Inuktitut text translated as follows:]
Please have a pleasant day.
[Speech from the Throne, provided by the Governor General:]
Honourable Senators,
Members of the House of Commons,
[The Governor General spoke in Inuktitut as follows:]
ᐃᓕᓴᖅᓯᑦᑎᐊᖁᖓ ᐃᓘᓐᓇᓯᓐᓂᒃ ᐊᒻᒪᓗ ᑐᓐᖓᓱᑦᓯᐊᕆᑦᑎ
ᓂᕈᐊᖅᑕᐅᕋᑖᖅᑐᓯ ᒐᕙᒪᑐᖃᒃᑯᓄᑦ. ᐃᓘᓐᓇᓯ, ᐃᓚᓯᓗ.
ᓂᕈᐊᖅᑕᐅᖃᑎᓯᓗ ᓱᕐᕋᐃᓂᐊᕋᑦᓯ ᑲᓇᑕᐅᑉ ᓯᕗᓂᒃᓴᖓᓂᒃ
[Inuktitut text translated as follows:]
I acknowledge your presence. I welcome those who are elected
parties to the federal government, every one of you and your fami‐
lies. You and your colleagues will govern Canada’s future.
[Speech from the Throne, provided by the Governor General:]
Congratulations to each of you and welcome to all the new Par‐
liamentarians who will together with their colleagues make their
mark on Canada.
I would like to acknowledge that we are gathered on the unceded
territory of the Algonquin Anishinabe people.
This land acknowledgement is not a symbolic declaration. It is
our true history. In each of your own ridings, I encourage you to
seek out the truth, and to learn about the lived realities in First Na‐
tions, Inuit and Métis communities. Although each community is
distinct, we all share a desire to chart a way forward together to‐
wards reconciliation.
The discovery of unmarked graves of children who died in the
residential school system shows how the actions of governments
and institutions of the past have devastated Indigenous Peoples and
continue to impact them today. We cannot hide from these discov‐
eries; they open deep wounds.
16 COMMONS DEBATES November 23, 2021
Opening of Parliament
Despite the profound pain, there is hope. There is hope in the ev‐
ery day. Reconciliation is not a single act, nor does it have an end
date. It is a lifelong journey of healing, respect and understanding.
We need to embrace the diversity of Canada and demonstrate re‐
spect and understanding for all peoples every day.
Already, I have seen how Canadians are committed to reconcilia‐
tion. Indigenous Peoples are reclaiming our history, stories, culture
and language through action. Non-Indigenous Peoples are coming
to understand and accept the true impact of the past and the pain
suffered by generations of Indigenous Peoples. Together they are
walking the path towards reconciliation.
We must turn the guilt we carry into action.
Action on reconciliation.
Action on our collective health and well-being.
Action on climate change.
[The Governor General spoke in Inuktitut as follows:]
ᐊᐅᓚᑦᑎᖃᐅᑕᐅᖃᑦᑕᕆᐊᖃᕋᑦᑕ ᑕᒪᓐᓇ ᐱᑦᑎᐊᖃᑎᒌᖕᓂᖅ
ᐱᓇᓱᐊᖅᑕᐅᑎᓪᓗᒍ ᐊᒻᒪᓗ ᐊᐅᓚᑦᑎᖃᑕᐅᒋᐊᖃᕋᑦᑕ ᐃᓅᓯᕗᑦ
ᑲᒪᒋᑦᑎᐊᕆᐊᖃᕐᓂᖓ ᐱᔾᔪᑎᒋᓗᒍ, ᐊᒻᒪᓗ ᐊᕙᑎᓕᕆᓂᕐᒥᒃ
ᑲᒪᖃᑕᐅᑦᑎᐊᕆᐊᖃᖅᑐᒍᑦ.
[Inuktitut text translated as follows:]
We need to manage and oversee the reconciliation process. We
need to better manage a healthier lifestyle. We need to take respon‐
sibilty for our environment.
[Speech from the Throne, provided by the Governor General:]
Our Earth is in danger. From a warming Arctic to the increasing
devastation of natural disasters, our land and our people need help.
We must move talk into action and adapt where we must. We can‐
not afford to wait.
From the grief and pain of residential schools to the fear of
threats to our natural environment to the profound impacts of the
COVID-19 pandemic, this past year has been hard on all of us.
I want to thank all workers across Canada, especially those in
health care, for their efforts to keep us safe and healthy, and offer
my deepest condolences to those who have experienced loss of
loved ones during the pandemic. It has touched us all, including
those in this chamber who lost a cherished colleague just a few
days ago, Senator Forest-Niesing. To her family and to all of you,
my deepest sympathies.
The pandemic has shown us that we need to put a focus on men‐
tal health in the same way as physical well-being because they are
inseparable.
As you begin this 44th Parliament of Canada, and as we recover
from the effects of the pandemic and build a better relationship be‐
tween Indigenous Peoples and non-Indigenous Peoples, I urge you
to transform discussion into concrete results for us and for our
country.
[The Governor General spoke in Inuktitut as follows:]
ᓈᓚᑦᓯᐊᕐᓗᑕᓗ ᐅᖃᐅᓯᖃᖅᑐᓂᒃ ᐊᓯᑦᑎᓐᓂᒃ ᐊᔾᔨᒌᓐᖏᑦᑐᓂᒃ
ᐅᖃᐅᓯᖁᑎᖃᕋᑦᑕ ᑕᒫᓂ ᓄᓇᕐᔪᐊᕗᒻᒥ
[Inuktitut text translated as follows:]
We need to better comprehend what others are communicating to
us. We all have different languages in our world.
[Speech from the Throne, provided by the Governor General:]
Collaborate with and listen to each other.
Listen to the diverse voices who speak a multitude of languages
and who shape this country.
Confronting the hard questions will not always be easy or com‐
fortable — and it will require conviction — but it is necessary. The
outcome will be a sustainable, united Canada, for you, for me, for
our children, and for every generation to come.
Opening
As we speak, British Columbians are facing immeasurable chal‐
lenges as their homes, their communities, and their wellbeing are
impacted by terrible flooding.
But in a time of crisis, we know how Canadians respond. We
step up and we are there for each other.
And the Government will continue to be there for the people of
British Columbia.
In 2020, Canadians did not know they would face the crisis of a
once-in-a-century pandemic. But, as always, no one should be sur‐
prised by how Canadians responded.
We adapted. We helped one another. And we stayed true to our
values.
Values like compassion, courage, and determination.
Values like democracy.
And in this difficult time, Canadians made a democratic choice.
Their direction is clear: not only do they want Parliamentarians
to work together to put this pandemic behind us, they also want
bold, concrete solutions to meet the other challenges we face.
Growing an economy that works for everyone.
Fighting climate change.
Moving forward on the path of reconciliation.
Making sure our communities are safe, healthy, and inclusive.
Yes, the decade got off to an incredibly difficult start, but this is
the time to rebuild.
This is the moment for Parliamentarians to work together to get
big things done, and shape a better future for our kids.
This is the moment to build a healthier today and tomorrow
November 23, 2021 COMMONS DEBATES 17
Opening of Parliament
Priority number one remains getting the pandemic under control.
The best way to do that is vaccination.
Already, the Government has mandated vaccination for federal
and federally-regulated workers, and for everyone travelling within
Canada by plane, train, or ship. It has also ensured a standardized
Canadian proof of vaccination for domestic and international use.
The Government is securing next generation COVID-19 vac‐
cines, boosters, and doses for kids from 5 to 11.
And around the world, Canada will continue working with its
partners to ensure fair and equitable access to vaccines and other
resources.
To build a healthy future, we must also strengthen our healthcare
system and public health supports for all Canadians, especially se‐
niors, veterans, persons with disabilities, vulnerable members of
our communities, and those who have faced discrimination by the
very system that is meant to heal.
There is work to be done. On accessibility. On care in rural com‐
munities. On delayed procedures. On mental health and addiction
treatment. On long-term care. On improving data collection across
health systems to inform future decisions and get the best possible
results.
The Government will work collaboratively with provinces, terri‐
tories, and other partners to deliver real results on what Canadians
need.
This is the moment to grow a more resilient economy
The best thing we can do for the economy remains ending the
pandemic for good. But as we do, we should rebuild an economy
that works for everyone. At the height of the lockdowns, the Gov‐
ernment made historic, necessary investments so families could
keep paying the rent and small businesses could stay afloat.
Now, with one of the most successful vaccination campaigns in
the world, and employment back to prepandemic levels, the Gov‐
ernment is moving to more targeted support, while prudently man‐
aging spending.
To ensure no one is left behind, support will be extended or
added for industries that continue to struggle.
At the same time, the Government will also continue making life
more affordable for all Canadians.
Inflation is a challenge that countries around the world are fac‐
ing. And while Canada’s economic performance is better than many
of our partners, we must keep tackling the rising cost of living. To
do that, the Government’s plan includes two major priorities: hous‐
ing and child care.
Whether it is building more units per year, increasing affordable
housing, or ending chronic homelessness, the Government is com‐
mitted to working with its partners to get real results.
For example, the Housing Accelerator Fund will help municipal‐
ities build more and better, faster.
The Government will also help families buy their first home
sooner with a more flexible First-Time Home Buyer’s Incentive, a
new Rent-to-Own program, and by reducing the closing costs for
first-time buyers.
Supporting families will make life more affordable for the mid‐
dle class and people working hard to join it.
The Canada Child Benefit has already helped lift hundreds of
thousands of children out of poverty and will continue increasing to
keep up with the cost of living.
The Government will also continue building the first-ever
Canada-wide early learning and child care system. By the end of
2022, average fees for regulated child care will be cut in half in
most of the provinces and territories. And in some places, this will
even happen as early as the start of the year. Families will save
thousands of dollars.
Four jurisdictions have not yet reached agreements on child care.
Two are territories with unique infrastructure challenges, and the
Government will keep working together to ensure we meet the
needs of the North. The Government will continue working with
the remaining two provinces to finalize agreements that will deliv‐
er $10-a-day child care for families who so badly need it.
Investing in affordable child care – just like housing – is not just
good for families. It helps grow the entire economy. And so does
immigration.
That is why the Government will continue increasing immigra‐
tion levels and reducing wait times, while supporting family reuni‐
fication and delivering a world-leading refugee resettlement pro‐
gram.
This is the moment for bolder climate action
Building a resilient economy means investing in people. But the
work does not stop there.
After all, growing the economy and protecting the environment
go hand in hand.
By focusing on innovation and good, green jobs, and by working
with like-minded countries – we will build a more resilient, sustain‐
able, and competitive economy.
As a country, we want to be leaders in producing the world’s
cleanest steel, aluminum, building products, cars, and planes. Not
only do we have the raw materials and energy to do that, most im‐
portantly, we have skilled, hard-working Canadians to power these
industries.
As we move forward on the economy of the future, no worker or
region will be left behind. The Government will bring together
provinces, territories, municipalities, and Indigenous communities,
as well as labour and the private sector, to tap into global capital
and attract investors.
Canada will emerge from this generational challenge stronger
and more prosperous.
The Government is taking real action to fight climate change.
Now, we must go further, faster.
18 COMMONS DEBATES November 23, 2021
Opening of Parliament
That means moving to cap and cut oil and gas sector emissions,
while accelerating our path to a 100 percent net-zero electricity fu‐
ture.
Investing in public transit and mandating the sale of zero emis‐
sions vehicles will help us breathe cleaner air.
Increasing the price on pollution while putting more money back
in Canadians’ pockets will deliver a cleaner environment and a
stronger economy.
Protecting our land and oceans will address biodiversity loss. In
this work, the Government will continue to strengthen its partner‐
ship with First Nations, Inuit, and Métis, to protect nature and re‐
spect their traditional knowledge.
Creating the Canada Water Agency will safeguard that vital re‐
source and support our farmers.
And to address the realities communities across the country al‐
ready face, the Government will also strengthen action to prevent
and prepare for floods, wildfires, droughts, coastline erosion, and
other extreme weather worsened by climate change. The Govern‐
ment will be there to build back in communities devastated by these
events. This will include the development of Canada’s first-ever
National Adaptation Strategy.
[The Governor General spoke in Inuktitut as follows:]
ᒫᓐᓇ, ᐊᒃᓱᕈᕆᐊᖃᕋᑦᑕ ᑕᒪᒃᑯᐊ ᓄᓇᖃᑎᒌᒃᑐᐃᑦ ᐃᑲᔪᕆᐊᖃᕋᑦᑎᒋᑦ
ᑖᓐᓇ ᐊᕙᑎᓕᕆᓂᖅ ᐊᒻᒪᓗ ᓯᓚᐅᑉ ᓱᒃᑯᑉᐸᓪᓕᐊᓂᖓ ᐱᔾᔪᑎᒋᓗᒍ ᐊᒻᒪᓗ
ᐋᓐᓂᐊᕕᖕᒪᕆᖕᓂᐅᖃᑦᑕᓚᐅᖅᑑᑉ ᐋᓐᓂᐊᕈᑕᐅᖃᑦᑕᖅᓯᒪᔪᐃᑦ
ᐱᔾᔪᑎᒋᑦᓱᒋᑦ ᐊᒻᒪᓗ ᑮᓇᐅᔭᖅᑎᒍᑦ ᐱᕈᕆᐊᖃᕐᓂᕗᑦ ᐱᔾᔪᑎᒋᖕᒥᓗᒍ
ᐊᒻᒪᓗ ᐊᑎᓯᖏᑦ ᑲᒪᒋᒋᐊᖃᖅᑕᕗᑦ ᕿᒪᐃᓐᓇᕆᐊᖃᓐᖏᒻᒥᒐᑦᑎᒍᑦ.
[Inuktitut text translated as follows:]
Now, we have to work harder to assist people on environmental
issues, climate change impacts, the pandemic and economic pros‐
perity. We must not exclude anything in the process.
[Speech from the Throne, provided by the Governor General:]
This is the moment to fight harder for safer communities
While we address climate change –
While we fight COVID-19 and its consequences –
While we grow our economy for everyone –
We cannot turn away from other challenges.
Gun violence is on the rise in many of our biggest cities.
While investing in prevention and supporting the work of law en‐
forcement, we must also continue to strengthen gun control.
The Government has taken important actions like introducing
lifetime background checks.
The Government will now put forward measures like a mandato‐
ry buyback of banned assault-style weapons, and move forward
with any province or territory that wants to ban handguns.
During the pandemic, we have also seen an unacceptable rise in
violence against women and girls.
The Government is committed to moving forward with a 10-year
National Action Plan on gender-based violence, and will continue
to support organizations providing critical services.
When someone in our country is targeted because of their gen‐
der, or who they love, or where they come from, the way they pray,
the language they speak, or the colour of their skin, we are all di‐
minished.
Everyone should be – and feel – safe.
The Government will continue combatting hate and racism, in‐
cluding with a renewed Anti-Racism Strategy.
This is the moment to stand up for diversity and inclusion
Canadians understand that equity, justice, and diversity are the
means and the ends to living together.
Fighting systemic racism, sexism, discrimination, misconduct,
and abuse, including in our core institutions, will remain a key pri‐
ority.
The Government will also continue to reform the criminal justice
system and policing.
This is the moment to rebuild for everyone. The Government
will continue to invest in the empowerment of Black and racialized
Canadians, and Indigenous Peoples. It will also continue to fight
harmful content online, and stand up for LGBTQ2 communities
while completing the ban on conversion therapy.
As Canadians, our two official languages are part of who we are.
It is essential to support official language minority communities,
and to protect and promote French outside and inside Quebec.
The Government will reintroduce the proposed Act for the Sub‐
stantive Equality of French and English and the Strengthening of
the Official Languages Act.
To support Canadian culture and creative industries, the Govern‐
ment will also reintroduce legislation to reform the Broadcasting
Act and ensure web giants pay their fair share for the creation and
promotion of Canadian content.
This is the moment to move faster on the path of reconcilia‐
tion
This year, Canadians were horrified by the discovery of un‐
marked graves at former residential schools.
November 23, 2021 COMMONS DEBATES 19
The Address
We know that reconciliation cannot come without truth. As the
Government continues to respond to the Calls to Action, it will in‐
vest in that truth, including with the creation of a national monu‐
ment to honour survivors, and with the appointment of a Special In‐
terlocutor to further advance justice on residential schools.
To support communities, the Government will also invest signifi‐
cantly in a distinctions-based mental health and wellness strategy,
guided by Indigenous Peoples, survivors, and their families.
Everyone in our country deserves to be safe.
That is why the Government will accelerate work with Indige‐
nous partners to address the national tragedy of Missing and Mur‐
dered Indigenous Women, Girls and 2SLGBTQQIA+ People.
The Government will also make sure communities have the sup‐
port they need to keep families together, while ensuring fair and eq‐
uitable compensation for those harmed by the First Nations Child
and Family Services program.
Reconciliation requires a whole-of-government approach, break‐
ing down barriers, and rethinking how to accelerate our work.
Whether it is eliminating all remaining long-term drinking water
advisories or implementing the United Nations Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous Peoples, the Government is committed to
closing the gaps that far too many First Nations, Inuit and Métis
communities still face today.
This is the moment to fight for a secure, just, and equitable
world
The last 19 months have underscored that we live in a deeply in‐
terconnected world.
Canada must stand up on the pressing challenges of our time,
through our own commitments and by increasing our engagement
with international partners, coalitions, and organizations.
In the face of rising authoritarianism and great power competi‐
tion, Canada must reinforce international peace and security, the
rule of law, democracy, and respect for human rights.
Canada’s prosperity – and middle class jobs – depend on preserv‐
ing and expanding open, rules-based trade and ensuring our supply
chains are strong and resilient.
At home, the Government will continue to protect Canadians
from threats to our communities, our society, and our democracy.
A changing world requires adapting and expanding diplomatic
engagement. Canada will continue working with key allies and
partners, while making deliberate efforts to deepen partnerships in
the Indo-Pacific and across the Arctic.
Increasing Canada’s foreign assistance budget each year, and in‐
vesting in sustainable, equitable, and feminist development that
benefits the world’s most vulnerable and promotes gender equality
will continue to be priorities.
We will always stand up for a brighter future for all.
Conclusion
This decade is still young. With compassion, courage, and deter‐
mination, we have the power to make it better than how it started.
But that can only happen by standing together.
Parliamentarians, never before has so much depended on your
ability to deliver results for Canadians.
That is what people expect and need from you.
In addition to ending this pandemic, their priorities for this 44th
Parliament are clear: a more resilient economy, and a cleaner and
healthier future for all of our kids.
I do not doubt that you will honour the trust that has been placed
in you.
Members of the House of Commons, you will be asked to appro‐
priate the funds to carry out the services and expenditures autho‐
rized by Parliament. Members of the Senate and Members of the
House of Commons, may you be equal to the profound trust be‐
stowed on you by Canadians, and may Divine Providence guide
you in all your duties.
[Translation]
Right Hon. Justin Trudeau (Prime Minister, Lib.): Mr. Speak‐
er, I move:
That the Speech from the Throne delivered this day by Her Excellency the Gov‐
ernor General to both Houses of Parliament be taken into consideration later this
day.
(Motion agreed to)
* * *
BUSINESS OF SUPPLY
Hon. Mona Fortier (President of the Treasury Board, Lib.):
Mr. Speaker, I move:
That the business of supply be considered at the next sitting of the House.
(Motion agreed to)
[English]
The Speaker: It is my duty to inform the House that a total of
two days will be allotted for the supply period ending December
10, 2021.
SPEECH FROM THE THRONE
[English]
ADDRESS IN REPLY
The House proceeded to the consideration of the speech deliv‐
ered by Her Excellency the Governor General at the opening of the
session.
Mr. Brendan Hanley (Yukon, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, drin gwiinzii.
It is an honour to rise in this House as a newly elected member of
Parliament. I would like to offer you my congratulations on being
elected Speaker yesterday. I wish you well, and I know you will
bring a steady hand to this House.
20 COMMONS DEBATES November 23, 2021
The Address
Before I begin, I would like to acknowledge that today we are
standing on the unceded territory of the Algonquin Anishinabe peo‐
ple.
I would also like to pay homage to the 14 first nations of the
Yukon. This is a proud moment for the Yukon and for the people
who call it their home. We are proud of the stunning beauty of our
territory. We are forever committed to the caring nature that binds
our northern community together, and we are deeply gratified to
call ourselves members of a wider family, a family of people who
call Canada their home.
In the recent election, the people of Yukon honoured me with
their trust to be their representative here in Ottawa. I thank them for
giving me this chance. It is a privilege to be standing here in this
House on behalf of the people of Yukon.
Today I would like to say clearly, as we move forward in this
Parliament, that I will do my best to fulfill my campaign commit‐
ments. I will work hard to maintain a strong voice for the Yukon
and for the north in Ottawa.
I believe it is important to note the significance of what has oc‐
curred today. The Speech from the Throne has just been delivered
by someone from northern Canada. Indeed, we must pause to re‐
flect on this. Today we have a Governor General who has made it
her life's work to promote and increase recognition of indigenous
rights and northern affairs. The symbolism of this cannot be over‐
stated.
Regardless of where we live in Canada, as a northern country we
are all northerners at heart. We are a country that in its heart aspires
for goodness, reaches for growth and looks for the better path. As
we begin this Parliament, these are values we can never forget.
They are values we must always adhere to.
Today's Speech from the Throne comes nearly two years after the
world was plunged into the biggest health and economic crisis of
our lifetime. Here in Canada we had a choice. We could retreat in
fear from COVID-19 or join hands and work together to confront
the challenge. I am proud to say that Canadians met the challenge. I
saw it first-hand in my job as the chief medical officer of health in
Yukon.
I want to take this moment to give tribute to my colleagues, my
CMOH colleagues and the chief public health officer of Canada,
who I worked with over the last two years. I was proud to be part of
a team with them.
I saw people who did not flinch from the challenge wherever
they were, from those at kitchen tables throughout the communities
of our nation, to the municipal officials who kept watch over our
villages, towns and cities. I saw first nation, Inuit and Métis leaders
and elders, the leaders who oversaw our provinces and our territo‐
ries, and those right here in Ottawa, where public servants and
politicians from all parties worked together to accomplish what
once seemed unthinkable.
We worked together to ensure that families had food on the table
and roofs over their heads. We followed public health advisories,
and we understood the need to wear a mask and keep our distance.
We worked together to mobilize an immunization program that
quickly saw millions of Canadians vaccinated against COVID-19.
We have shown what we can do. We can do big things, and we
can do them quickly. This is the lesson of COVID-19.
As we consider today's throne speech, let us remember that this
is not the time to be timid. This is not the time to back away from
the challenges that lie before us just because they seem too big to
overcome. This is a time to take action. It is time to get things done
for Canadians.
● (1425)
In that regard, our government has come forward with a throne
speech that presents ambitious plans to tackle big challenges. They
include action on the COVID-19 pandemic, climate change, indige‐
nous reconciliation, economic recovery, mental health and addic‐
tion, child care, affordable housing, diversity, and safe communi‐
ties. Let us review each of these areas one by one.
As I mentioned earlier, in my work as chief medical officer of
health in the Yukon, I witnessed the power of what we can accom‐
plish when a health crisis hits us. I saw how hard my public health
colleagues worked in the Yukon and throughout the country.
[Translation]
This throne speech clearly indicates that the government's priori‐
ty remains getting the pandemic under control. Make no mistake:
The best way to do that is vaccination. Our government is commit‐
ted to meeting that objective.
We have mandated vaccination for federal and federally regulat‐
ed workers, and for everyone travelling within Canada by plane,
train or ship. Our government is securing next generation
COVID-19 vaccines, boosters and doses for kids from 5 to 11,
much to many parents' relief.
The pandemic is definitely not over, but we are firmly on the
path that will lead us to the end of this unprecedented journey.
[English]
Our experience over the last two years has reinforced a valuable
lesson, which is that our health care system is vital to our quality of
life. It is at the heart of how we conduct ourselves as a compassion‐
ate, caring people, so the throne speech stresses that we must
strengthen our health care system, especially for seniors, veterans,
persons with disabilities and those in our communities who are vul‐
nerable. We have much work to do.
Health care needs to be more accessible to the many Canadians
who are facing delays in their medical procedures. Our long-term
care system needs reform. We must finally provide the mental
health care services that many Canadians are waiting for, and we
must address the other health crisis that has killed thousands of
Canadians.
November 23, 2021 COMMONS DEBATES 21
The Address
We must move quickly and with compassion to help the many
Canadians who are in the grip of addiction to drugs. The opioid or
toxic drugs crisis is a scourge we must address. Our neighbours,
friends and family members are living with and dying from addic‐
tion. We must do everything we can to help them. Our government
has signalled in the throne speech that it will do just that.
On another matter, we are all aware of the dangers that climate
change poses to our country and the world. Our country is commit‐
ted to pressing ahead with measures to reduce greenhouse gas emis‐
sions, and we are committed to doing so in a fashion that includes
action to create green jobs and to build a sustainable economy that
grows.
As the throne speech emphasized, we need to look to the future.
We need to be world leaders in producing clean steel, aluminum,
cars and planes. We can do this with our innovation and with a
skilled workforce, and our government is committed to doing this
the right way. We will leave no region behind. We will work with
everyone: provinces, territories, municipalities, indigenous commu‐
nities, business and labour.
As we move forward, we cannot turn our back on what needs to
be done to fight climate change. We must move toward putting a
cap on oil and gas emissions. We must invest in public transit, and
we must put a price on pollution. We are committed to doing this,
and to doing it right. It will be part of our generation's legacy to
fight climate change and green our economy.
All Canadians are standing in support of British Columbians and
our dear neighbours to the south in the wake of weather disasters
they have experienced recently, including fires, flooding and mud‐
slides. Our government will strengthen action to prepare for floods,
wildfires, droughts, coastal erosion and other extreme weather
events that are the result of climate change.
I would also like to highlight how the throne speech has focused
on an important issue of affordability. Many Canadians are con‐
cerned about how they are going to pay their bills. During the pan‐
demic, our government made sure Canadians and businesses were
not left behind. As we transition out of the pandemic, we are mov‐
ing to more targeted benefits, but we are still supporting those peo‐
ple working in industries that are still struggling. All the while, we
are fully aware of the challenge that inflation poses for families.
That is why we are moving to make life more affordable for Cana‐
dians.
● (1430)
We are doing this by making it more affordable for Canadians to
own homes. The housing accelerator fund will help cities build
homes faster, and the first-time home buyer incentive will help
families, as will a new rent-to-own program.
We are also moving in another area to significantly reduce costs
for families, and that is child care. For many years parents have
struggled with rising child care costs. Our government introduced
the Canada child benefit, which helped pull hundreds of thousands
of children out of poverty.
Now we are moving to work with provinces and territories to
create a Canada-wide early learning and child care system. By the
end of next year, average child care fees will be cut in half in most
of the participating provinces and territories.
We will continue to work toward reaching agreements with the
two provinces that have not yet signed on. The goal of $10-a-day
quality child care for families is within reach.
As we move forward in this Parliament, all of us here have a du‐
ty to face a truth. That truth is that there is much more we need to
do as a country on the path of reconciliation with indigenous peo‐
ples. The shock we all felt earlier this year when we learned about
hundreds of graves of children at residential schools cannot be for‐
gotten.
The throne speech commits our government to move faster on
the path of reconciliation. We will continue to respond to the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission's calls to action. We will create a
national monument to honour survivors. We will appoint a special
interlocutor to advance justice on residential schools, and we will
invest in communities with help for a distinctions-based mental
health strategy guided by indigenous peoples, survivors and their
families.
The throne speech notes that, while we address these major chal‐
lenges of COVID-19, climate change, the economy and more, we
cannot forget that gun violence is on the rise in many of our major
cities. Our government will continue to invest in prevention and in
supporting our law enforcement agencies.
As we take these steps, we will take action to prevent the unac‐
ceptable rise in violence against women and girls. Our government
will move forward with a 10-year national action plan on genderbased violence.
As the throne speech makes clear, we will fight all forms sys‐
temic racism, sexism and discrimination. Our government will in‐
vest in the empowerment of Black and racialized communities. We
will fight harmful online content, and we will stand up to support
2SLGBTQQIA+ communities. We will accomplish what was left
behind from the last Parliament. We will ban the disturbing practice
of conversion therapy.
● (1435)
[Translation]
We will always stand up for diversity. I am proud to see that the
throne speech emphasized the fact that our two official languages
are part of who we are as Canadians. Our government's commit‐
ment to supporting official language minority communities, includ‐
ing those in my territory, Yukon, is clear. We promise to protect and
promote French within and outside Quebec, and we will act on that
promise by reintroducing a bill to strengthen the Official Lan‐
guages Act.
22 COMMONS DEBATES November 23, 2021
The Address
[English]
It is also important to know our government has signalled in the
throne speech its strong support for the cultural sector. In that re‐
gard, we will reintroduce legislation to reform the Broadcasting Act
so web giants pay their fair share for the creation and promotion of
Canadian content.
On the world stage, Canada has always been a proud player. We
stand up for our values, and we are respected for that. This will
continue under our government.
The throne speech commits Canada to standing up to the press‐
ing challenges of our time. Amidst the rise of authoritarianism, we
will reinforce peace and security, the rule of law, democracy and re‐
spect for human rights.
At the same time, we will work to preserve and expand open,
rules-based trade with strong and resilient supply chains. There is
cause for hope and there is cause to be optimistic for our country.
We are a nation that has accomplished, and can accomplish, great
things. The throne speech has provided us with a road map for how
to get it done.
Therefore I move, seconded by the hon. member for Pontiac, that
the following address be presented to Her Excellency the Governor
General of Canada:
[Translation]
To Her Excellency the Right Honourable Mary May Simon, Chancellor and
Principal Companion of the Order of Canada, Chancellor and Commander of the
Order of Military Merit, Chancellor and Commander of the Order of Merit of the
Police Forces, Governor General and Commander-in-Chief of Canada.
[English]
May it please Your Excellency:
We, Her Majesty's most loyal and dutiful subjects, the House of Commons of
Canada, in Parliament assembled, beg leave to offer our humble thanks to Your Ex‐
cellency for the gracious Speech which Your Excellency has addressed to both
Houses of Parliament.
● (1440)
Ms. Melissa Lantsman (Thornhill, CPC): Mr. Speaker, it is an
honour to rise in the House for the very first time as the member of
Parliament for the riding of Thornhill, and I thank the member for
his speech. I thank the voters of Thornhill who sent me to this place
to ask questions on points that I really did not hear the member
speak about. A 4.7% inflation rate is impacting families across
Canada. Food is getting more expensive, gas and home heating are
costing more, and housing prices continue to reach record highs.
Can the member opposite tell Canadians what measures in to‐
day's speech, in which inflation was mentioned a grand total of one
time, will address the cost of living for my community of Thorn‐
hill?
Mr. Brendan Hanley: Mr. Speaker, I congratulate the member
opposite on her recent election. Liberals are well aware of the threat
of inflation and the answer is well embedded in the Speech from
the Throne. This is about affordability—
The Speaker: I am just going to interrupt the hon. member for
Yukon for a second. We are just starting off and I was hoping that
we might have respect for each other. When someone is speaking
on either side, I hope members have the decency to listen to what
they have to say, whether it is a question, a comment or an answer.
The hon. member for Yukon.
Mr. Brendan Hanley: Mr. Speaker, the members opposite who
were listening would have heard about affordability for Canadians
being a key aspect of our path forward, as affordability of housing
and affordability of child care.
[Translation]
Mr. Jean-Denis Garon (Mirabel, BQ): Mr. Speaker, allow me
to use this first opportunity in the House to address the people of
the great riding of Mirabel. I thank them for placing their trust in
me. Allow me also to address my partner, my love, Dyhia. She sup‐
ports me in this endeavour and joins me in this journey.
Finally, I would like to acknowledge my predecessor, Simon
Marcil, for his commitment to our beautiful riding.
After the election, the people back home told me that they are
glad that we have a minority government because they expect the
parties to work together. As it happens, we line up with the Liberals
on some issues, including climate change. During the election cam‐
paign, we ran on forcing the banks to publicly disclose their inter‐
ests and their investments in activities that hurt the environment
and have a lasting impact. Unfortunately, that proposal is missing
from the Speech from the Throne.
Can I count on the full support of my dynamic colleague from
Yukon to convince his government to add this proposal to its priori‐
ties?
● (1445)
Mr. Brendan Hanley: Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate
the member on his recent election. I thank him for the question.
We are committed to bringing in climate change measures as
soon as possible. We will consider all options, but we promised to
take strong action right out of the gate.
[English]
Ms. Laurel Collins (Victoria, NDP): Mr. Speaker, I want to
thank the people of Victoria for placing their trust in me. My home
province of British Columbia is reeling after devastating floods. We
saw climate-related fires and record-breaking heatwaves, but in‐
stead of taking real action on the climate crisis or investing in cli‐
mate solutions, the current government has been increasing fossil
fuel subsidies year after year. Instead of investing in supporting
workers in a transition, it is handing out billions of dollars to the
big companies fuelling the climate crisis.
November 23, 2021 COMMONS DEBATES 23
The Address
Why is there no mention of eliminating fossil fuel subsidies?
Why is there no mention of a just transition act? We heard a lot
about climate action, but we have heard this before. We have the
worst record of any G7 country. How are Canadians supposed to
trust that these are not just more empty Liberal promises?
Mr. Brendan Hanley: Mr. Speaker, I again reflect on the
tragedy that has affected British Columbia. As a Yukoner, I feel
particularly close to the disaster in British Columbia and the losses
that people have faced and are facing.
Perhaps the most compelling reason I decided to run for election
was for firm action on climate change. The Liberal Party plan is the
most ambitious and aggressive in Canadian history.
Mr. Ryan Williams (Bay of Quinte, CPC): Mr. Speaker, it is
my pleasure to rise for the first time as Conservative MP for the
Bay of Quinte. It is my hope that we keep sitting in the House.
In my riding, there are multiple issues facing Canadians includ‐
ing immigration, inflation, a lack of skilled labour and mental
health, but nothing is as dire right now as housing. In Prince Ed‐
ward County, house prices have increased 170% this year alone.
Last month, the average house price was $1.2 million, which is
quite unaffordable. When we look at Belleville and Quinte West,
house prices have doubled. At CFB Trenton, we currently have 300
men and women in uniform awaiting housing. Housing in the Lib‐
eral plan has just not worked in my region.
Speaking of respect, will the government commit to working
with Conservatives on fixing this housing crisis once and for all?
Mr. Brendan Hanley: Mr. Speaker, again, I congratulate the
member opposite and thank him for his question. The housing crisis
is real and is the most common question that I heard during my
campaign, whether in remote, rural Yukon or in our city of White‐
horse.
The answer to the housing crisis is clear: making housing more
affordable. The plan is well outlined in the throne speech. The best
way to address the housing crisis is to work together as parliamen‐
tarians to solve this pressing crisis that is affecting all Canadians
from coast to coast to coast.
● (1450)
[Translation]
The Speaker: We have just enough time for one short question.
The hon. member for Terrebonne.
Ms. Nathalie Sinclair-Desgagné (Terrebonne, BQ): Mr. Speak‐
er, I am so proud to be here today to represent the people of Terre‐
bonne. I wanted to take a moment to thank them for electing me. I
was pregnant, very pregnant, when they elected me. In doing so,
they chose to send both a mom and female MP to Ottawa.
I am also proud to represent the Bloc Québécois, a party that al‐
ways makes concrete proposals. That is precisely what was missing
from the throne speech: concrete proposals and responses, particu‐
larly regarding how to move away from fossil fuels and address the
climate crisis and the labour shortage. The throne speech did not
provide any answers to those issues.
Mr. Brendan Hanley: Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member for
her comments, but I did not hear a question there. If it was an invi‐
tation to work together for the well-being of Canadians, I am ready
to do so.
Mrs. Sophie Chatel (Pontiac, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, I want to be‐
gin by acknowledging that we are gathered on the traditional un‐
ceded territory of the Algonquin Anishinabe people.
This is my first time rising in the House. I would like to start by
congratulating you on your election, Mr. Speaker. I would also like
to thank you for what you said yesterday about respect and listen‐
ing. That really resonated with me. You also stressed the impor‐
tance of setting an example for the young people who are listening
to us and of creating an atmosphere in the House where women can
express themselves fully and completely.
I am honoured to have been elected by my community. I want to
thank the people of Pontiac, a microcosm of the Canadian mosaic
with its French-speaking and English-speaking rural communities,
indigenous communities and a very multicultural urban element. I
thank them all for their trust.
I would also like to thank my family and friends, who supported
my first foray into politics.
Before I became an MP, I worked for the OECD, where we
mainly sought to ensure that countries around the world agree to
ensure that large multinationals pay their fair share of taxes. I also
worked in the public service, and I would like to take this opportu‐
nity to commend all of my colleagues who have been working very
hard to provide outstanding service to Canadians, particularly dur‐
ing the pandemic.
It is even more important to talk about taxation today. Given that
we are emerging from a pandemic and facing significant climate
change, it is important that the wealthy, the large multinationals and
all those who are successful share and act in such a way that we are
able to overcome the pandemic and fight this significant climate
change together.
Like many communities in Canada, the communities in Pontiac
are tight-knit. They have been very resilient during the pandemic
and I am sure that they will be able to deal with all of the other
challenges. Being an MP is about more than just listening to and
representing people. It is about acting as a liaison between Canadi‐
an politics and local initiatives.
Since 2015, the Liberal government has been working to protect
the environment and grow the economy. It has also been supporting
families and growing the middle class. We can be very proud of the
work that has been accomplished.
24 COMMONS DEBATES November 23, 2021
The Address
However, there is still a lot of work to be done. Major challenges
lie ahead. To overcome them, we need to work with our colleagues
in the other parties, as well as with the provinces and territories. As
we develop our policies, we must include indigenous communities
every step of the way, not to mention the municipalities, which will
be on the front lines of implementing our climate plans. We must
work together to build a stronger, greener, fairer and more resilient
Canada.
As Her Excellency the Governor General said in the Speech from
the Throne, our priorities for this 44th Parliament are clear. We will
work together to end the pandemic, while building a more resilient
economy and a greener future, so that generations to come can en‐
joy what we have enjoyed.
In 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic turned our country upside
down. Canadians have gone through some very difficult times. I
would like to offer my sincere condolences to all those who have
lost loved ones during this pandemic.
● (1455)
I also want to thank the health care workers for their ongoing ef‐
forts to support our communities. Our government knows that the
best tool for keeping this pandemic under control and putting an
end to it is vaccination. We made sure to have enough doses for all
Canadians to get them vaccinated quickly. What is more, we have
reached another important step in the fight against COVID‑19, the
approval of vaccines for children 5 to 11.
We have brought in measures to end this pandemic, including re‐
quiring proof of vaccination and making vaccination mandatory for
federal employees and anyone travelling by plane, train, or boat.
We will continue to move forward together and strengthen the
health care system by working with the provinces and territories.
As we all know, one of the biggest challenges of our time is
fighting climate change. Like my hon. colleague from Yukon, that
is why I am here in the House. Since 2015, the government has put
a price on pollution, one of the highest in the world. We set a goal
to be carbon neutral by 2050. We have banned the sale of new gaspowered vehicles by 2035 and invested more than $100 billion in
climate action and the green recovery.
Canadians are already feeling the effects of climate change and
are very worried about what global warming will bring. Indeed, be‐
fore the recent floods, British Columbians were battling forest fires
this summer. We also endured our share of disasters in Pontiac, not
to mention the whole issue of melting Arctic ice. Canada is re‐
sponding to global warming by developing the first-ever national
adaptation strategy.
In the throne speech, our government has committed to capping
and cutting oil and gas sector emissions, while accelerating our
path to net zero. We have committed to protecting our land and
oceans, and to creating the Canada water agency to protect this vital
resource.
Members of Parliament are in a position to galvanize people in
support of local initiatives to implement Canada's climate plan, and
my team and I did exactly that this week when we launched an ini‐
tiative to build a green and prosperous Pontiac.
[English]
Our government knows that fighting climate change and eco‐
nomic growth go hand in hand. Canada is a world leader and will
continue to be a world leader in the production of steel, aluminum
and the batteries essential for the production of our electric vehi‐
cles. We will be a leader in tomorrow's economy. For the sake of
future generations, we must do everything in our power to ensure
that climate action is at the heart of every one of our policy deci‐
sions.
[Translation]
The pandemic has devastated the global economy. Our Liberal
government was there to support businesses, organizations and
Canadians so that we could face this unprecedented crisis together.
Canada's job numbers are back to prepandemic levels.
● (1500)
Our government will move to targeted support while prudently
managing spending. We are well aware that the cost of living is in‐
creasing around the world. As mentioned in the throne speech, to
address this challenge, the government will build more housing
through a new fund for municipalities. It will help families buy
their first home and increase the stock of affordable housing. I will
work hard to also ensure that the voice of rural communities is
heard on this file.
In addition, the Canada child benefit helped lift thousands of
children out of poverty. Our government will continue increasing
this payment so it will keep up with the cost of living. We will con‐
tinue building the first-ever Canada-wide early learning and child
care system. Canadian families will finally have access to afford‐
able $10-a-day child care. This will make it possible for women to
return to the labour market and enjoy financial independence.
Quebec has seen far too many femicides since early 2021. Vio‐
lence against women and girls has become more severe during this
pandemic. The government is committed to moving forward with a
10-year national action plan on gender-based violence and will con‐
tinue to support organizations that work hard to provide critical ser‐
vices to women and girls across the country.
It is not just women and girls we must keep safe, but all Canadi‐
ans. There has been a serious rise in gun violence in our cities. We
are determined to eliminate this problem by implementing such
measures as criminal background checks, the mandatory buyback
of assault-style weapons and support for the provinces and territo‐
ries that want to ban handguns in their jurisdictions.
November 23, 2021 COMMONS DEBATES 25
The Address
I am sure that Canadians want a country in their own image,
where human rights are not only respected but also promoted and
supported. Although Canada is a leader in that respect, we still have
work to do.
Our government believes that battling systemic racism and dis‐
crimination must be a priority. We have heard Canadians stand up
courageously against the injustice they witness day after day. Sadly,
there is no denying that systemic racism exists in Canada. As par‐
liamentarians, we have a responsibility to talk about this situation
and fight it. The government is committed to taking action. That is
why we will keep working to advance the autonomy and prosperity
of Black and racialized communities and indigenous peoples. Our
government will also continue to reform the criminal justice system
and policing to tackle the overrepresentation of racialized and in‐
digenous individuals in Canadian prisons.
● (1505)
[English]
Our government will continue to combat harmful content online
and will be a strong advocate for the LGBTQ2 community. Our
government will complete its work on banning conversion therapy.
These types of therapy are extremely harmful to the mental health
and well-being of people. That is why we must ensure that such
practices are illegal in Canada.
[Translation]
It is true that it is 2021, and attitudes and institutions have no
doubt improved, but more than ever, we are talking about reconcili‐
ation and the importance of communicating and collaborating with
indigenous peoples. As stated in the Speech from the Throne, rec‐
onciliation cannot come without truth.
Like many Canadians, I was deeply affected and frankly horri‐
fied by the discovery of the unmarked graves at former residential
schools. The history of these young children and their families must
not be forgotten. Together, we must continue to fight the injustices
that indigenous peoples continue to suffer. One of the worst
tragedies our country is facing is the murder and disappearance of
indigenous women, girls and individuals in Canada.
Our government understands the importance of taking action and
will accelerate work with its indigenous partners to address this na‐
tional tragedy. As mentioned in the Speech from the Throne, recon‐
ciliation requires a whole-of-government approach to break down
barriers and build a better world.
I am a proud Quebecker. French is the language I work in and the
language I raised my children in. We know that we must ramp up
our efforts to protect French in Quebec and in francophone commu‐
nities outside Quebec, especially since we are in the minority in
North America. I am reassured to see that our government has de‐
cided to reintroduce its bill for the substantive equality of French
and English and the strengthening of the Official Languages Act.
It is essential to support official language minority communities
and to promote French across the country. We can use arts and cul‐
ture to protect and promote our official languages. As members
know, the pandemic has been tough on these communities, on our
artists. Our government will continue to support the cultural indus‐
try by introducing new legislation to reform the Broadcasting Act
and ensure that web giants pay their fair share for the creation and
promotion of Canadian content.
We live in a deeply interconnected world, and Canada must rein‐
force peace, international security, the rule of law, respect for hu‐
man rights, and democracy. Canada will continue to prioritize in‐
creasing its foreign assistance budget each year and investing in
sustainable development.
I want to conclude by emphasizing that Canadians elected us to
work constructively and collaboratively on advancing their priori‐
ties. That is what I plan to do, and our government will as well. We
are privileged to serve as members of Parliament. We must work as
a team to serve Canadians from coast to coast to coast.
Together, we will overcome this pandemic. We will transition to
a green economy, we will fight climate change together, and we
will tackle many more challenges together.
● (1510)
Mrs. Dominique Vien (Bellechasse—Les Etchemins—Lévis,
CPC): Mr. Speaker, I first want to say hello to you and to every‐
one. I am very pleased to be here today. Before I begin, I must give
a special thanks to the people of Bellechasse—Les Etchemins—
Lévis for putting their trust in me. I am honoured. This is the fifth
time I have been elected in this riding.
The throne speech makes no mention of the labour shortage, and
yet Canada is under a lot of pressure. The labour shortage is hurting
our economy. All sectors are affected. Businesses have had to cut
production and some have even had to turn down contracts. In my
riding, 91 businesses have 1,402 job openings. Groupe Coté Inox,
Exceldor and Plastiques Moore are three of these businesses. They
know this reality first-hand. That is on top of runaway inflation and
surreal debt.
Why does the government still claim to be a credible economic
actor? What will it do to fill our businesses' vacant positions? As
my colleague was saying, we have the same number of jobs but no
one to fill them.
Mrs. Sophie Chatel: Mr. Speaker, I thank my hon. colleague
and congratulate her on being elected.
Together, Canadians have done extraordinary work to recover
from the worst economic crisis since the Second World War. Only
that tremendous effort enabled us to save our economy and main‐
tain the progress we have made. Of course we still have work to do.
We have all heard about the job shortage, and together we will find
better solutions. For starters, we need to invest in immigration pro‐
grams, make those processes easier, and ensure full employment in
our communities. We all know that will be a challenge, and I hope I
can count on my colleagues to help us overcome it.
26 COMMONS DEBATES November 23, 2021
The Address
● (1515)
Mr. René Villemure (Trois-Rivières, BQ): Mr. Speaker, a
minute is all I need to comment on the throne speech, because say‐
ing that the speech had no substance whatsoever would be an un‐
derstatement.
I want to acknowledge the people of Trois-Rivières who placed
their trust in me. They put their trust and their future in the hands of
someone else and I thank them for that. I also thank the volunteers
who worked with me and without whom this would not have been
possible.
Those issues that were urgent before the election are no less ur‐
gent today. Climate action is urgent. Just look at British Columbia.
However, if the throne speech is any indication of the government's
climate plan, then this government will miss the mark yet again.
Addressing illegal gun trafficking is urgent. Just look at Montre‐
al. However, there was no indication in today's speech that the gov‐
ernment is willing to do whatever it can to stop the violence.
We are at the very beginning of the session and the government
already seems out of breath. The Bloc Québécois is reaching out
once again, hoping that the government's measures are more than
just words, words and more words.
Urgent action is needed. Will my colleague work with us to make
sure that the government's policies are up to the task?
Mrs. Sophie Chatel: Mr. Speaker, I thank my hon. colleague
from Trois-Rivières and I congratulate him on his election win.
I have to say that the climate crisis is indeed at the heart of every
action this government takes. This has been true since 2015 and
will remain true going forward. It is also at the heart of our eco‐
nomic policies. We have already invested over $100 billion in cli‐
mate action, and we will increase the effectiveness of our measures.
Working together to address this crisis is one of the ways we will
achieve our goals.
With regard to guns, we are going to abolish assault-style
weapons, and we will work with those provinces that want to re‐
strict handguns. Violence in our cities and towns must stop.
[English]
Ms. Lori Idlout (Nunavut, NDP): Uqaqtittiji, first, it was in‐
credible to hear a part of the throne speech delivered in Inuktitut.
Canada is richer for it and my sincere congratulations to Her Excel‐
lency Mary May Simon. I love that a qulliq was lit beside her and
that I could smell it from where I stood.
I also want to thank all the Nunavummiut who voted for me, sup‐
ported me and trusted me to represent them in this House.
As I flew from community to community, one constant message
was heard, “We need housing and we need it now.” As members
are aware, Nunavut has been facing a housing crisis for decades.
Nunavummiut have been seeking help from the federal government
to build more and better quality housing.
I would like to know when the Liberal government is going to
move from planning to actually funding more housing for
Nunavummiut, first nations, Métis and Inuit across Canada.
● (1520)
[Translation]
Mrs. Sophie Chatel: Mr. Speaker, the housing crisis is indeed a
problem across Canada, but it is particularly serious in our indige‐
nous communities.
[English]
It is important that the government acts on all fronts, and espe‐
cially in our indigenous communities. I have two indigenous com‐
munities in my riding, and affordable housing is even more urgent
in those communities.
We have committed as a government to do more on housing and
more for indigenous communities facing various crises. Housing is
one, but mental health is another crisis. We commit to work with
the indigenous communities to resolve those crises.
Mrs. Shelby Kramp-Neuman (Hastings—Lennox and
Addington, CPC): Mr. Speaker, I thank my family, the volunteers
and the good people of Hastings—Lennox and Addington for
granting me this great responsibility in sending me to this House.
The Liberal government has presided over record inflation. Sad‐
ly, this is crippling Canadian businesses, families and farms. Hast‐
ings—Lennox and Addington is not exempt from this. Out-of-con‐
trol inflation, debt and the cost of living caused by the irresponsible
Liberal government is unacceptable.
Many businesses, families and seniors in the communities in my
riding are struggling and are on the brink of bankruptcy. They need
meaningful leadership. They need help. Canadians deserve to know
when the government will finally listen and take concrete action
against this cost of living crisis.
Mrs. Sophie Chatel: Mr. Speaker, the Canadian economy was
facing, along with the whole world, the worst crisis it has faced
since World War II, and look at where we are now.
Look at where we are now. We are strong because of this govern‐
ment. We are stronger and we will build better, and we will build
without leaving anyone behind. That is important.
Hon. Erin O'Toole (Leader of the Opposition, CPC): Mr.
Speaker, as leader of the official opposition and leader of the Con‐
servative Party, I want to take this opportunity to congratulate all
members of the 44th Parliament for being here today and for some
of the first questions we heard in this debate.
The Conservative opposition is concerned by what was not in the
Speech from the Throne. We are concerned by the fact that millions
of Canadians will continue to be left behind by the Liberal govern‐
ment, which has no plan to fight inflation, in a throne speech that
recycles many of the lofty promises we heard six years ago.
November 23, 2021 COMMONS DEBATES 27
Privilege
[Translation]
Next week, I am going to give my response to the throne speech,
and I am going to explain why members on this side of the House
are concerned about what we heard today.
[English]
I will speak further about our response to Speech from the
Throne, but right now, I move, seconded by the opposition House
leader:
That the debate be now adjourned.
(Motion agreed to)
* * *
● (1525)
[Translation]
PRIVILEGE
ALLEGED NON-COMPLIANCE WITH AN ORDER OF THE HOUSE
Mr. Gérard Deltell (Louis-Saint-Laurent, CPC): Mr. Speaker,
the last time the House met was on June 23.
At that time, a serious question of privilege had been raised, be‐
cause the Liberal government had defied the order of the House to
table documents related to the National Microbiology Laboratory in
Winnipeg.
On June 23, my colleague, the whip for the official opposition,
was the first to inform the House of an act that is completely unac‐
ceptable for any parliamentarian. For the first time in our parlia‐
mentary history, the government used the judiciary to attack the
legislative branch. For the first time, the government used the jus‐
tice system to prevent an order of the House from being adopted.
I remember it like it was yesterday. I was looking at my iPhone,
and I saw that there was a case involving the Attorney General of
Canada versus you, Mr. Speaker. Your name was there. It seemed
so unbelievable that I had to check with my esteemed colleagues on
the Conservative leadership team three times to make sure that
what I was reading was true. It was unbelievable, but unfortunately
it was true. The government was taking the House of Commons to
court to prevent it from implementing a decision that had been duly
voted upon by members.
June 23 will therefore always be a sad day for all parliamentari‐
ans.
I therefore rise today to once again raise this important question
of privilege regarding the fundamental right of the House of Com‐
mons to enforce this decision.
[English]
What we have seen is totally unacceptable. Why, for the first
time in Canadian parliamentary history, did we see the government
knocking on the door of the justice system to make sure the House
of Commons could not do what it had to do? I will always keep in
my memory the famous picture of the document I saw on my
iPhone with the Attorney General's name versus the Speaker's
name. It was totally unacceptable, but that is the tradition of the
current Liberal government and we cannot accept any part of that
inside this House.
[Translation]
I would like to quote page 81 of House of Commons Procedure
and Practice, third edition:
The House of Commons enjoys very wide latitude in maintaining its dignity and
authority through the exercise of its contempt power. In other words, the House
may consider any misconduct to be contempt and may deal with it accordingly.
What follows is interesting:
Instances of contempt in one Parliament may even be punished during another
Parliament.
In concrete terms, the Prime Minister's decision to dissolve Par‐
liament for his own personal gain and vanity resulted in an almost
identical Parliament, but at a cost of $600 million to Canadian tax‐
payers. All that for what amounted to a cabinet shuffle in the end.
Dissolving Parliament does not kill a question of privilege.
[English]
I recognize that for many of us, our minds are still on the Speech
from the Throne, which the Governor General just delivered, but I
wanted to raise this question of privilege as soon as possible, bear‐
ing in mind your ruling on September 30, 2020.
Let me quote page 353 of the Debates, finding that the question
of privilege that had been raised when the House opened on the
third day of the session failed to meet the necessity for timeliness.
I raise this important question of privilege at the first opportunity
as it concerns not only the official opposition members, but all par‐
liamentarians here in the House. The current government failed to
recognize that the House is more important than anything else when
we talk about parliamentary debate, parliamentary democracy and
the parliamentary rights of the people who are sitting in the House.
● (1530)
[Translation]
Let us recall the facts surrounding the infamous Winnipeg lab
scandal.
[English]
In March, the then president of the Public Health Agency of
Canada, Iain Stewart, was a witness at the Special Committee on
Canada-China Relations, where its members were unsatisfied with
his answers. On March 31, the committee ordered the agency to
produce certain documents. The agency would only partly comply
with the order.
[Translation]
On May 10, the committee issued another order to give the agen‐
cy a second chance, but the agency failed to abide by the order at
two more committee meetings.
On June 2, the House adopted the motion that the Conservatives,
the official opposition, moved in the House. The motion called on
the House to issue an order for these documents.
28 COMMONS DEBATES November 23, 2021
Privilege
[English]
The agency again refused to comply fully. The then Minister of
Health claimed she had referred the matter to the National Security
and Intelligence Committee of Parliamentarians.
[Translation]
I therefore raised a question of privilege on June 16, which the
Chair allowed.
[English]
The Chair, recalling Mr. Speaker Milliken's historic ruling in re‐
spect of the Afghan detainee documents, ruled that the House had
every right to compel the production of documents.
The Chair also ruled that, contrary to that case, which arose from
a recklessly drafted Liberal opposition motion, the House had taken
the necessary steps to balance parliamentary responsibility with the
protection of national security and to promote dialogue with the
government on this issue.
As for the Liberals' attempt to sidestep the House order with a re‐
ferral to the National Security and Intelligence Committee of Par‐
liamentarians, you stated clearly that it did not fulfill the House's
order.
In response, I moved a motion to find the agency in contempt
and to order Mr. Stewart to appear at the bar of the House to re‐
ceive on behalf of the agency the Speaker's admonishment, and to
deliver the ordered documents. That motion was adopted by the
House the following day.
On June 20, a day before he was due to appear at the bar, Mr.
Stewart provided notice to the Attorney General, under section
38.01 of the Canada Evidence Act, that the agency ”was required to
disclose of sensitive or potentially injurious information in relation
to a proceeding before the House of Commons and a special com‐
mittee.”
On June 21, Mr. Stewart appeared here, at the bar of the House
of Commons, to receive the Speaker's historic admonishment on
behalf of the agency.
However, the chair also received a letter from Mr. Stewart's
counsel advising that Mr. Stewart was unable to produce the docu‐
ments and as a consequence of his notice to the Attorney General,
“statutory prohibition and disclosure remains in effect until either
the Attorney General authorizes the disclosure or the Federal Court
orders it.”
[Translation]
We unfortunately came to learn that in this case, the Attorney
General was on the government's side and not on the side of Cana‐
dians or even the House of Commons.
Because the government was systematically refusing to hand
over the documents set out in the order issued by the House, I
raised a second question of privilege, and I would like to have that
question examined again.
[English]
In the interest of time, I will need to refer members to the fuller
submissions, by which I mean the House on June 7, June 15, June
21 and June 23, concerning these matters, along with submissions
of the chief opposition whip on June 21 and June 23. Beyond that,
there have been subsequent developments on this file that I also
hope to highlight.
On June 21, the then government house leader was the hon.
member for Honoré-Mercier. I want to pay all my respects to my
former counterpart. He wrote to the Chair and notified the House
that, in the government's opinion, the House's power to send for
persons, papers and records was subject to implicit statutory limita‐
tions.
To resolve the impasse, he proposed two options that were not
forthcoming in response to any of the four earlier motions, includ‐
ing my first question of privilege. I will come back in a few min‐
utes to those so-called options. Additionally, unknown to the cham‐
ber at the time, counsel, on the Attorney General's behalf, simulta‐
neously applied to the Federal Court for an order under the Canada
Evidence Act to prohibit disclosure of the remaining information.
That was done without the knowledge of the House of Com‐
mons.
We were then served with court documents. On June 23, the me‐
dia reported on the government's Federal Court application, bring‐
ing it to public attention.
● (1535)
[Translation]
In response to several points of order on this matter, you stated
the following in the House, and I quote from page 9062 of the De‐
bates:
I want to confirm that the argument is that the legal system does not have any
jurisdiction over the operations of the House. We are our own jurisdiction. That is
something we will fight tooth and nail to protect, and we will continue to do that.
That is exactly what every parliamentarian should bear in mind,
what every person who is duly elected by the people should know
and bear in mind, especially those who have the privilege of exer‐
cising the supreme authority, in this case with respect to the execu‐
tive. These people must bear in mind that they are first and fore‐
most members elected by the people, that they are first and fore‐
most accountable to the people and that, above all, they should not
have shown contempt for the House of Commons as they did.
Fortunately, Mr. Speaker, you were there at the time, and you
made the decisions and provided arguments that were quite appro‐
priate in this terrible situation when the House of Commons was
being attacked on all sides by the Liberal government.
[English]
Later that afternoon, the law clerk appeared as a witness before
the health committee. In response to questions, he noted that, to his
knowledge, the government's Federal Court application was an un‐
precedented court proceeding concerning a document production
order. Then, he was instructed by the Speaker to challenge the Fed‐
eral Court jurisdiction on the basis of parliamentary privilege,
which vests in the House exclusive authority on that matter.
November 23, 2021 COMMONS DEBATES 29
Privilege
[Translation]
More troubling still is the fact that the government took advan‐
tage of the summer break to launch a direct attack on all 338 mem‐
bers of the House of Commons, including themselves, as it hap‐
pens.
[English]
It was totally disrespectful the way the government at the time
attacked the House of Commons while we were not sitting. By the
way, just by a miracle, the government decided to postpone and
shut down everything, and prorogue the House of Commons with
an unnecessary election. This is the Liberal tradition, and never has
any government gone so low in attacking the House of Commons.
A hearing on that motion was later scheduled for September 16
and 17, but when the Prime Minister called his cynical and selfserving general election, the government discontinued entirely its
federal court application given that the House order fell with the
dissolution of Parliament.
I want to share with the House how masterfully the Speaker's
counsel, at paragraphs 25 to 29 of the motion, demolished the gov‐
ernment's claim that the Canada Elections Act applies to the House
order. It said:
“Only Parliament itself has the authority to abrogate, modify or
limit parliamentary privilege. Any intention by Parliament to [do]
so must be evidenced by clear and incontrovertible means. Section
38 of the [Canada Evidence Act] discloses no such intention. To the
contrary, the clear intent of [section] 38 is that it does not apply to
the House of Commons and its committees, which do not fall under
the definition of ‘proceeding’ that is central to the [Canada Evi‐
dence Act] process.
“‘Proceeding’ under [section] 38 of the [Act] is defined to mean
‘a proceeding before a court, person or body with jurisdiction to
compel the production of information’. Had Parliament intended
for this definition to include the House and/or its committees, and
thereby to abrogate, modify or limit its privilege to send for per‐
sons, papers or records, a clear and incontrovertible intention to do
so would have been required. No such intention was demonstrated
or expressed.
“Further, during debate in the House of Commons on the Bill
that introduced [section] 38 into the [Act], the definition of ‘pro‐
ceeding’ was amended with the explicit stated purposes, as con‐
firmed by [Stephen Owen] the then Parliamentary Secretary to the
Minister of Justice and Attorney General of Canada ‘of clarifying
[Parliament’s] intention that parliament’s privilege to send [for]
persons, papers and records not be affected by this legislation’.
“The earlier proposed definition of the term ‘proceeding’ in the
Bill would have applied the [Canada Evidence Act] process to Par‐
liament by incorporating the definition of ‘judicial proceeding’ set
out in [section] 118 of the Criminal Code that expressly included a
proceeding ‘before the Senate or House of Commons or a commit‐
tee’. The amendment to the Bill confirms Parliament’s intention
that [section] 38 of the [Canada Evidence Act] not affect parlia‐
mentary privileges, including the power to send for persons, papers
and records. The amendment was made specifically to recognize
and affirm that parliamentary privilege was not affected by this leg‐
islation.
“Accordingly, the [Canada Evidence Act] process has no appli‐
cation to the House of Commons’ privileges, including its power to
send for persons, papers and records, which remains unfettered.”
● (1540)
[Translation]
That was a very long quote, but it explains exactly what we are
here for today. I would like to express my appreciation for those
who, on behalf of all parliamentarians, chose to do the right thing to
protect the right of all members, the right of the House of Com‐
mons and our privilege, which we must vigorously defend against
people who irresponsibly take it upon themselves to attack Parlia‐
ment's authority. Unfortunately, those people are currently the Gov‐
ernment of Canada, thirty-odd members of which find themselves
in an incredible conflict of interest. Those people participated in a
vote, and they lost, but they are challenging that decision in court
even though they themselves are members of Parliament. As the
documents submitted to the Federal Court have made abundantly
clear, such actions are totally unacceptable.
I would like to note the questionable approach, to put it politely,
behind the legal arguments the government has used throughout
this entire saga. For one thing, it used the same sentence with two
different possible meanings depending on its point of view. In Fed‐
eral Court, the Attorney General stated that “a court, person or
body with jurisdiction to compel the production of information”, as
set out in section 38 of the Canada Evidence Act, includes orders of
the House of Commons and its committees.
[English]
However, beforehand, the government had taken the view that
the same phrase, that is, “a court, person or body with jurisdiction
to compel the production of information”, as it appears in para‐
graph 8(2)(c) of the Privacy Act, does not capture parliamentary
production orders.
My colleague, the hon. member for Wellington—Halton Hills,
has often pointed to that exemption in the Privacy Act for a govern‐
ment to disclose information.
[Translation]
However, on May 10, Christian Roy, executive director and se‐
nior general counsel at the Department of Justice, told the Special
Committee on Canada-China Relations:
Basically, we recognize the jurisdiction of committees to request documents and
to call witnesses. That said, in terms of paragraph 8(2)(c), we're talking about a ju‐
risdiction to compel. There's a difference of opinion here. We don't recognize the
committee's jurisdiction to compel in this area.
30 COMMONS DEBATES November 23, 2021
Privilege
Either the sentence includes the House and its committees or it
does not. It cannot be both. They want to see which way the wind is
blowing. In cruder terms, a person who is two-faced has twice as
many cheeks to slap. That is exactly what the government was do‐
ing.
● (1545)
[English]
Turning back to the Speaker's Federal Court motion, the stakes of
the matter are very well articulated at paragraphs 30 and 31.
“The present Application seeks to involve the Federal Court in
an impermissible intrusion upon the independence of the legislative
branch, which would violate the fundamental constitutional princi‐
ple of separation of powers.
“The concern is particularly acute here, where the Attorney Gen‐
eral of Canada seeks to have the court prevent the disclosure of
documents requested by the House of Commons ‘except as previ‐
ously authorized’ by the government. This is antithetical to the
House of Commons’ central role of holding government to account
and strikes at the core of parliamentary privilege that serves to pro‐
tect the House of Commons’ ability to fulfill its constitutional func‐
tions without outside interference.”
Bearing in mind this clear and compelling argument, this is
where a lawyer might say, “I rest my case.”
[Translation]
However, there are other elements we must take into account.
The fact that the government openly defied the authority of the
House of Commons constitutes a prima facie attack on Parliament
and its most fundamental rights.
To fully understand what is going on, we must gauge the magni‐
tude of the utterly unacceptable act this government committed.
That calls for a little history lesson. Let us go way back in time so
we can contextualize today's debate.
This incident happened in 1704 in England's House of Commons
and is known as Ashby v. White.
[English]
It asserted that “any attempt to challenge its jurisdiction would
amount to a breach of privilege,” as explained at paragraph 16.2 of
the 25th edition of Erskine May.
Subsequently, in Stockdale v. Hansard, a case well known in the
law of parliamentary privilege in relation to the House's right to
print papers, a select committee, appointed by the House of Com‐
mons of the United Kingdom to consider this litigation, recom‐
mended at paragraph 78 of its report:
That by the law and privileges of Parliament, this House has the sole and exclu‐
sive jurisdiction to determine upon the existence and extent of its privileges; and
that the institution or prosecution of any action, suit, or other proceedings, for the
purpose of bringing them into discussion or decision before any court or tribunal,
elsewhere than in Parliament, is a high breach of such privilege, and renders all par‐
ties concerned therein amenable to its just displeasure, and to the punishment con‐
sequent thereon.
This recommendation was subsequently adopted by the Com‐
mons on May 30, 1837.
In the initial litigation, Messrs. Hansard lost. As a result, as para‐
graph 16.3 of Erskine May explains, the House “agreed that, in case
of future actions, the firm should not plead and that the parties
should suffer for their contempt of the resolutions and defiance of
the House's authority.”
All of that is to say that the very action of openly challenging the
House's authority in court is, in my view, a contempt of the House
with established precedents backing up that perspective.
[Translation]
As I said, that was the first time in the history of Canada's Parlia‐
ment that a government did such a thing, and it is appalling. Worse
still, we are clearly fully aware that this remains a precedent buried
deep in our British parliamentary system—
The Speaker: Order. The hon. member for Ajax on a point of or‐
der.
[English]
Hon. Mark Holland: Mr. Speaker, we are in a new Parliament.
All proceedings in the previous Parliament ended at dissolution.
The facts that the member is raising were the subject of discussion
in the previous Parliament, and those studies and motions are no
longer in effect. I would therefore assert that a motion or committee
report would be necessary in order to proceed with the point of or‐
der. It is premature; it is not in order at this time.
The Speaker: I want to outline something. We have a question
of privilege and I have been getting a lot of details. This is not rid‐
ing on the point of order, but I want to remind the hon. members
that it is to give us an idea that there is something we can pursue
and it is prima facie, that is, there is a case that we can pursue after.
What I am hearing is that more of a full case is being argued, with a
lot of details that I think we do not need. Let me rephrase that: We
do not need them at this time. I am sorry; I saw the look on the hon.
member's face.
At this time, I would like to ask the hon. member to be concise
and wrap up, and then we can move on from there.
The hon. member for Ajax does have a good point. This is from
the previous Parliament. However, if someone wants to bring it up
again, we have to bring it up as prima facie, determine whether it is
a case and take it from there.
I will go back to the hon. member for Louis-Saint-Laurent and
let him wrap up.
Mr. Gérard Deltell: Mr. Speaker, first of all, I can assure you
that it is not my face that is speaking; I speak when I have some‐
thing to say. However, I appreciate the fact that you are looking
closely at the reactions of members of the House of Commons.
I want to say to my counterpart that I welcome him in his new
role. I am a veteran here because I was here before. I am joking be‐
cause I know that he has a lot of experience, more than me, and I
appreciate the fact that he is the new House leader. I am sure we
will have a lot of fun.
November 23, 2021 COMMONS DEBATES 31
Privilege
That said, I welcome everybody in the House and invite them to
be very attentive to what we have to say, because what we are talk‐
ing about is why we are here in the House of Commons. The mem‐
ber raised a point of order, but I just answered that point of order a
few minutes ago. I invite him to read again what I had to say. I am
sure he will find an answer to his point of order.
[Translation]
I will quickly summarize what I want to say about that. The ar‐
gument that the government will likely raise is that it made the
House an offer, but that offer does not stand up, especially since the
government itself revoked it.
There are many other elements to address. Most of them were
submitted to the court under your authority, meaning the authority
of the House of Commons, when this government decided to take
legal action against the House. We did not know about these ele‐
ments before the House rose on June 23.
That is why we intend to remind the House of the key elements
of this situation. Never in the history of Canada has a government
used the justice system to diminish the role of the House of Com‐
mons and prevent the House from doing its job. That is a very seri‐
ous concern because Canadians want to know what happened at the
National Microbiology Laboratory in Winnipeg.
Never in the history of Canada has the executive branch used the
judiciary to attack the legislative branch. However, there is an ex‐
ample of that in modern history. It happened in July 1974 when a
document released at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue in Washington
triggered the Watergate scandal.
● (1550)
[English]
It was United States v. Nixon.
[Translation]
The President of the United States went to court to prevent elect‐
ed representatives from Congress from accessing certain docu‐
ments. That is exactly what the Canadian government is doing right
now, and I would like to remind it of one thing: The President of
the United States left office after that ordeal.
The Speaker: I thank the hon. member. The Chair will take all
of that into consideration and come back to the House with a ruling.
The hon. member for La Prairie is rising on the same matter. We
are trying to determine whether there is a question of privilege and
I would like to remind the hon. member, before I recognize him, to
be as brief as possible.
Mr. Alain Therrien (La Prairie, BQ): Mr. Speaker, I would
like to respond to the question of privilege raised by my hon. col‐
league from Louis‑Saint‑Laurent. Could I have four or five minutes
to speak, or is that too long? I would like to explain the Bloc
Québécois's position.
The Speaker: I would ask the member to be very brief.
Mr. Alain Therrien: Mr. Speaker, I would like to bring to your
attention certain points that I believe are essential for your consid‐
eration with regard to my colleague's question of privilege.
On the last day of the last Parliament, you promised the House
that in the event of its dissolution should the government call a gen‐
eral election, the Speaker of the House of the new Parliament
would review and rule on the questions of privilege that remained
unanswered.
We are currently debating one such question regarding the failure
by the president of the Public Health Agency of Canada to table
documents requested by a formal order of the House on June 2,
2021. I believe that this question needs to be given priority, espe‐
cially given its importance in maintaining the authority and dignity
of the House of Commons and protecting constitutional rights, both
the collective rights and privileges of the House and those of elect‐
ed representatives as individuals.
I want to remind the House of two points. First, the government
failed to comply with the orders issued by the Special Committee
on Canada-China Relations on March 31 and May 10, 2021, and
the orders issued by the House of Commons on June 2 and June 17,
2021. Second, the Speaker admonished the Public Health Agency
of Canada's top bureaucrat for contempt. It is quite worrisome that
the Liberal government's response to the House of Common's order
was to take legal action against the House in Federal Court to seal
the requested documents. For all these reasons, we cannot let this
stand.
I repeat that this is about protecting the authority and dignity of
our institution, and the Speaker has a duty to protect the constitu‐
tional rights of the legislative branch. The authors of the third edi‐
tion of House of Commons Procedure and Practice addressed this
point on page 82, stating that disobedience of a legitimate com‐
mand of the House must be considered contempt, especially when a
witness without reasonable excuse refuses to provide information
or produce papers required by the House.
I would like to quote what you said on June 21 about this matter:
The privileges held by the House of Commons are an integral part of the Consti‐
tution Act, 1867, and the Parliament of Canada Act. These rights include the right
to require the production of documents. Under the Standing Orders of the House of
Commons, committees of the House exercise these same rights when carrying out
their respective mandates.
Although he was ordered to produce documents at least four
times, the president of the Public Health Agency of Canada failed
to respect the will of the House, which is significant, and voluntari‐
ly failed to produce the requested documents relating to the security
breaches at the National Microbiology Laboratory in Winnipeg and
the firing of the two scientists from the lab.
The June 17 order was very clear that two things had to happen.
First, the president of the Public Health Agency of Canada,
Mr. Stewart, was to attend at the bar to receive the deserved admon‐
ishment for the repeated failure to comply with the previous orders
of the Special Committee on Canada-China Relations. Second, he
was to table the required documents, which, unfortunately, has not
yet happened.
32 COMMONS DEBATES November 23, 2021
Privilege
We debated it at length on the last day of the previous Parlia‐
ment. The arguments that were made and the references that were
mentioned give Parliament the full authority to use its power to en‐
force the orders adopted by the majority.
In closing, given the foregoing comments, we ask you to protect
the parliamentary rights and privileges of the House and the elected
representatives who make it up, to preserve the authority and the
dignity of the House, which is no small matter, and to rule accord‐
ingly under the circumstances so that the order of June 17, 2021, is
duly respected and the documents are properly submitted to the
House.
The Bloc Québécois therefore supports the official opposition's
proposal in this regard.
● (1555)
[English]
Hon. Mark Holland (Leader of the Government in the House
of Commons, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, I will say to the opposition
House leader that absolutely we have excellent conversations. I ap‐
preciate the opportunity to begin working with him. I congratulate
him on his reappointment to that position.
To the opposition House leader of the Bloc, who was just speak‐
ing, we similarly have had very strong conversations, as we have
with the House leader for the NDP. I think we will have ample op‐
portunity to be able to discuss these matters in detail.
The problem that arises, and this was the point I made earlier, is
that in the absence of a motion or a committee report that would be
necessary to proceed in this, it is simply premature.
I would state that this is not to be before the House at this time.
This is not a matter that should be dealt with here, at this moment.
However, I would encourage the House leaders, who are going to
be meeting in about an hour, to continue the conversation in that fo‐
rum, as that would be the appropriate place to continue the conver‐
sation.
The Speaker: It is nice to hear that discussions are going on and
about to happen, and hopefully they are fruitful.
The hon. member for Vancouver Kingsway is rising on a point of
order as well.
Mr. Don Davies (Vancouver Kingsway, NDP): Mr. Speaker, I
actually rise to speak to the question of privilege raised by my hon.
colleague from the official opposition. Before I start, I would take
this opportunity to thank the wonderful people of Vancouver
Kingsway for doing me the honour and privilege of electing me to
represent them. I will be mercifully brief and concise.
Yesterday, on the opening day of the 44th Parliament, we heard
repeated invocations from all sides of this House about the need to
honour and respect this institution and each other. We were remind‐
ed of the foundational principles of this place. Those principles in‐
clude democracy, the rule of law and the supremacy of Parliament.
No government of any stripe is entitled to ignore these fundamental
principles of our nation. To do so is an act of autocracy and a repu‐
diation of the basic tenets of our nation, for which so many fought
and died.
If a majority of members in this place vote to produce documents
that they deem necessary to carry out their duty to the people they
represent, who elected them to be here, then this must be complied
with. This is regardless of how embarrassing or inconvenient a gov‐
ernment of the day may find such a request. Indeed, that is often
when it is most important to comply.
It is about accountability. It is about transparency and it is about
respect for Parliament. New Democrats will always support these
cherished cornerstones of responsible government. As such, we
support this claim of privilege and respectfully ask you to uphold it
in our name.
● (1600)
The Speaker: I want to thank the hon. member for being brief
and concise, the way that it should be.
The hon. member for Saanich—Gulf Islands is rising on this is‐
sue as well.
Ms. Elizabeth May (Saanich—Gulf Islands, GP): Mr. Speaker,
I will be even more brief and concise than my friend from Vancou‐
ver Kingsway to say on the record that the Green Party is equally
concerned and supports the concerns of the hon. member for LouisSaint-Laurent, the hon. member for La Prairie and the hon. member
for Vancouver Kingsway. Time has gone by, and it is hard to assert
that this matter is premature.
The Speaker: Before beginning with the hon. member for Bar‐
rie—Innisfil, I just received something here about the Speaker's
role and exactly what the Speaker is supposed to do.
It ought to be explained that the issue that is before the Speaker
is not finding of fact. It is simply whether a first impression of the
issue that is before the House warrants priority consideration over
all other matters of the day that are put before the House. I just
want to make sure that we understand exactly what the process is
and why we are bringing it up. We make sure that the issue is very
pressing and then we run with it. When any new items come up, we
want to make sure they are important, and that is something that the
Speaker will have to rule on and determine.
I am not saying it is or it is not. I am just saying this is the pro‐
cess and I want to make sure everyone understands so we do not go
into too many details that will not leave us anything to debate after‐
wards.
The hon. member for Barrie—Innisfil.
ALLEGATIONS CONCERNING THE CLERK OF THE HOUSE
Mr. John Brassard (Barrie—Innisfil, CPC): Mr. Speaker, let
me begin by congratulating you on your election as Speaker. As we
all know, it comes with a tremendous amount of responsibility to
conduct oneself in an impartial manner, and I have the utmost con‐
fidence in your ability to do that. Congratulations once again.
November 23, 2021 COMMONS DEBATES 33
Privilege
I am rising on a question of privilege today concerning the very
troubling allegations published this month respecting the Clerk of
the House. I am sure we have all watched or read Ashley Burke's
reporting on these matters. It was based on at least 10 different
credible sources as well as primary documents, but it is important
to put the most pertinent details on the record of the House.
Broadly speaking, the allegations fall into one of two distinct but
no less troubling categories. One concerns a management style that
has led to a rapid loss of top talent and deep experience from the
table, and the other concerns demonstrations of partisanship
through the Clerk's comments and actions.
I understand that some of the complainants' letters, cries for help
really, have even recently made it into some Parliament Hill inbox‐
es, and it is my respectful view that all told, these allegations
amount to a prima facie case of privilege, which the House must
address urgently.
I will be focusing on the partisanship allegations, but I cannot
turn a blind eye to what the CBC confirmed. Three senior figures at
the table took sick leave and then early retirement, while a fourth
senior official is now on sick leave, owing to the Clerk's manage‐
ment style.
According to CBC, Colette Labrecque-Riel—
The Speaker: I am disturbed by the attack on individuals in our
administration from either side. Something we have to look at is
that these items are personnel items and normally dealt with at the
Board of Internal Economy. To attack someone with allegations
who is already in our administration I find very troubling. I feel that
if the hon. member wants to deal with that item, I would feel much
more comfortable and would ask him to have his members of the
Board of Internal Economy bring it forward and actually look into
the facts rather than the allegations that are being brought forward.
To attack someone who cannot defend themselves in the cham‐
ber, I feel, is very troubling, and I must stop that attack. I ask the
member to talk to his representatives on the Board of Internal
Economy so that we can look into it deeper, find out what the facts
are and then proceed from there.
● (1605)
Mr. John Brassard: Mr. Speaker, as I stated at the outset, the al‐
legations are extremely disturbing and troubling. If we are going to
go back and forth on this, I think—
The Speaker: I will let the hon. government House leader rise
on this question of privilege.
Hon. Mark Holland (Leader of the Government in the House
of Commons, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, let us not start this Parliament in
this way, by attacking servants of the House. There is a forum for
this. You have stated that that forum is the Board of Internal Econo‐
my. That is where we deal with personnel matters. We do not deal
in this chamber in parlaying in rumours and things that people re‐
ceived in their inboxes, with all due respect to the member across
the aisle.
Every individual who works for this place, particularly those
who are servants of this place and do not have the ability to defend
themselves or stand in their places to give their side of the story,
should have these matters adjudicated in camera, with the opportu‐
nity for all of the facts to be present as opposed to a one-sided
smear of an individual who is trying to serve this place and to do so
with distinction and honour.
Mr. Speaker, we have heard enough. Please let us end this.
Hon. Michelle Rempel Garner (Calgary Nose Hill, CPC): Mr.
Speaker, congratulations on your role.
I would make this argument. Allegations have come to light
about somebody who is serving in this room's capacity to serve the
House. Those allegations speak to our privilege as members, in that
some of the allegations that I believe my colleague will address
speak to investigations that did not come to light. These did not
happen at the Board of Internal Economy. The allegations that have
also come to light since the dissolution of the last Parliament relate
to the ability of the House to address sexual harassment issues, in‐
cluding from former members of staff.
At the start of this Parliament, it is imperative that we understand
if the House has the ability, under the leadership of this person, to
conduct appropriate investigations and ensure that sovereignty is
maintained. This is not just a breach of a staff member's privilege,
but it is a breach of my privilege.
On the 100th anniversary of the first woman being elected to the
House of Commons, I would argue that systemic misogyny and the
inability of the House to adequately address sexual harassment is‐
sues is in fact a breach of privilege. I believe what my colleague is
about to do is to explore and give you, Mr. Speaker, evidence to
consider whether or not this is the case.
The time to do this is now, at the start of the first Parliament. The
allegations that have come to light over the last several weeks
deeply suggest that something is wrong and something is amiss,
and that the typical processes through the Board of Internal Econo‐
my, in which someone in this room has a significant role, are not
able to function. That in and of itself is a case of privilege.
On this point of order I would say, respectfully, Mr. Speaker, out
of respect for this institution, as well as a note to my colleague to
be concise in his arguments, that this is something we absolutely
must address in this place, particularly for the people at home who
cannot speak here and who have been impacted by this. You were
very right in saying that there are people here who do not have a
voice and this place is for us to give a voice to them.
Mr. Speaker, respectfully, and again to my colleagues, I ask that
they bring these matters up in fact-based, non-partisan facts. We are
dealing with the ability of the House to function in this Parliament.
I am deeply troubled by it. I am also tired of having to stand up and
give the same speech in the same iteration over and over again. I
would ask respectfully that my colleague be allowed to continue. I
will probably add to his argument. I would ask my colleague to be
concise in his argument, but this must be addressed. Light must be
shone on it. It is only to be done in this place.
34 COMMONS DEBATES November 23, 2021
Privilege
The Speaker: Just so that the hon. member has some back‐
ground here, sexual harassment is something that is being dealt
with as part of the agenda in the next Board of Internal Economy
meeting. Looking at the facts is very important.
The hon. member for Banff—Airdrie.
● (1610)
Mr. Blake Richards (Banff—Airdrie, CPC): On that same
point of order, when a member rises in this place to bring forward a
question of privilege, that is to bring arguments before you, Mr.
Speaker, to give you the opportunity to determine whether there is
in fact a breach of privileges, it is not for the government House
leader or anyone else in this place to determine the validity of that
question of privilege. He can certainly make his arguments, if he
wishes, when the member making the question of privilege has fin‐
ished making his points.
As my colleague has just indicated, obviously whatever would
have occurred at the Board of Internal Economy has not managed
to resolve this matter. If it is a breach of members' privileges, this is
the place for it to be dealt with. I would also remind the House that
the Clerk is in fact appointed by the House, not by the Board of In‐
ternal Economy. There is an argument that needs to be made here in
the House.
I think it is important that this member be heard, and that he has
the opportunity to bring forward his points so that you, Mr. Speak‐
er, can properly determine this. It is not for anyone else to make
that determination. I think he should be allowed the opportunity to
make his points so that you can determine whether there is in fact a
breach of privilege.
The Speaker: I want to thank the hon. member for that point,
and I agree with him on the point of process and how the Clerk is
appointed. That is something that gets decided by members, and
that is something we can look at.
However, when it comes to personnel issues, I feel very strongly
that these should be dealt with at the Board of Internal Economy.
When these come up, they should be dealt with there by all mem‐
bers. There is representation from all sides on that one.
I will let the hon. member for Barrie—Innisfil continue, but I
want to ask for less innuendo. Just stick to the facts, please. That is
all I ask, to say something that we can prove. We want to see the
facts.
I will ask the hon. member for Barrie—Innisfil to continue.
Mr. John Brassard: Mr. Speaker, the arguments that have been
made are profound on the part of the privilege and the rights of
members. The Speaker will recall that some very serious allega‐
tions have been made that I believe breach the rights and privileges
of members, not the least of which is a table officer acting in a par‐
tisan manner.
I am not attempting to bring those issues in a manner that exacer‐
bates the kinds of challenges that exist. What I am trying to do is
lay out the facts as we now know them so the Speaker can make a
prima facie case of the rights and privileges of the members being
dealt with.
At the end of what I am presenting, I offer an option and a solu‐
tion that the Speaker can act on, but in the absence of presenting the
facts as we know them and the facts as they came out, it is awfully
difficult for me to talk in terms that would give the Speaker a better
understanding to make a decision that is in the best interests of the
House. We are dealing with not just the rights and privileges of our
members, but also the confidence in the ability of our democracy
and our democratic institutions to function in the manner in which
they should.
Some of those accusations, as salacious as they are and as un‐
comfortable as they may be, are very important points I need to
make in this discourse to the Speaker. I would ask for some latitude
with that and ask that I continue to lay these out not as a way to
disrespect a certain individual but to present the information that is
in front of me, and that has been presented to all of us as members,
as it relates to our rights and privileges.
I will continue in the manner in which I started, which is to lay
out this case to suggest that the rights and privileges of members
have been breached as they relate to the functioning of our democ‐
racy.
As I continue, according to CBC, Colette Labrecque-Riel, a for‐
mer clerk assistant, wrote to the Speaker that—
● (1615)
The Speaker: We have a point of order from the hon. govern‐
ment House leader.
Hon. Mark Holland: Mr. Speaker, this is a terrible precedent. If
we are going to adjudicate claims or rumours of harassment in this
forum, where there is parliamentary privilege and where the indi‐
viduals in question cannot defend themselves, it is an abhorrent
precedent. We have the Board of Internal Economy. We have a pro‐
cess for this.
I stand not only because of this situation, but for any person who
would ever wish to serve the House and who could imagine them‐
selves in a situation where their accuser was given the opportunity
to fully display the arguments of the accusation, but the person who
was being accused was afforded no opportunity of defence or to
produce their evidence. There is a process for that, called in cam‐
era. It is called the ability to examine these facts.
I remind members that we are talking about the Clerk of the
House of Commons, a servant of 40 years whose integrity is being
questioned at this moment. On the allegations, a third party inde‐
pendent report was done that stated the attacks on his integrity and
honesty were “baseless”.
To litigate these matters in the House without the opportunity for
the individual in question to stand and defend himself or to produce
evidence to the contrary is an abhorrent violation of what any em‐
ployee should expect in terms of protection so these matters can be
looked at. There is a precedent being established in this chamber
right now. There is a line being crossed.
I ask the Speaker to please, for the sake of this place and the peo‐
ple who would serve it, to stop this absolute farce from continuing.
Hon. Michelle Rempel Garner: Mr. Speaker, I am rising on the
same point of order.
November 23, 2021 COMMONS DEBATES 35
Privilege
For what it is worth, I think you may have a point on perhaps not
reiterating the entirety of the allegations that have been reported to
the CBC. However, I would ask that you understand that these are
material to the case that is about to be made. I am not a member of
the Board of Internal Economy. I would like to speak to this ques‐
tion of privilege from a different angle than perhaps my colleague
will, but I think it is important that you hear him speak to what he
believes the breach of privilege is. This is the time to do it, at the
start of this Parliament. I am acutely aware, personally, of the rami‐
fications I might have in my role because of questioning someone
in a position of power such as the person we are discussing. I un‐
derstand what that might mean for me given the import of his role
in the House of Commons.
I would not be doing this lightly if I did not feel it material to the
functioning of the House going forward. I would ask you respect‐
fully to allow my colleague to continue. I would perhaps strongly
agree with you that my colleague keep his argument tight to the
matter at hand and only refer to the allegations and assumptions as
we know them, but we are allowed to make the case of privilege.
The Speaker: These are allegations. The facts should be found
and discovered. I would be very happy to put this on the agenda, as
the Chair of the Board of Internal Economy, to be dealt with in the
right process. It is something that I would be very comfortable
with. An open chamber such as this is not the right place to debate
this issue. That is my view of it. The whip of the opposition is on
the Board of Internal Economy.
Does the hon. member for Banff—Airdrie have something to add
to that? Does he agree with me?
● (1620)
Mr. Blake Richards: Mr. Speaker, I would agree that it is proba‐
bly best that the member gets to what he sees is the breach of privi‐
lege. It is important, and it should be important, that he gets an op‐
portunity to lay out the facts. Perhaps that will happen at a later
date should you find a prima facie case. However, I think it is im‐
portant that you hear what he sees is a breach of privilege before
you make a ruling. It is critically important that you give him the
opportunity to do that concisely and quickly because that is impor‐
tant before you make a ruling.
The Speaker: The hon. member for Barrie—Innisfil must keep
it very concise and to the point. Please do not bring up allegations
that have not been proven. We are talking about a personnel issue.
When personnel issues are dealt with they need to be dealt with in
the Board of Internal Economy, normally as in camera items be‐
cause they involve personnel. Most big corporations, private corpo‐
rations and small companies do not discuss personnel issues in pub‐
lic. I honestly feel very strongly about this.
I will let the hon. member for Barrie—Innisfil continue. Again,
you have a very quick point to make. As I said, you have my word
that it will go to the Board of Internal Economy as part of the agen‐
da and be dealt with in the right process.
Mr. John Brassard: Mr. Speaker, before I continue, I would like
to ask for unanimous consent to table copies of the relevant PCO
documents that were disclosed through access to information. I
would like unanimous consent for that.
The Speaker: Do I have unanimous consent?
Some hon. members: No.
The Speaker: I am afraid we do not have unanimous consent.
I will let the hon. member for Barrie—Innisfil continue.
Mr. John Brassard: Mr. Speaker, without laying out properly
the facts of this case as we know them, it is awfully difficult to
present a prima facie case, but regrettably a cloud has been placed
upon the House administration, and it certainly has given Conserva‐
tives cause to reflect on what extent to which we can collaborate. In
fact, the same paranoia is, as we have seen, among House officials
themselves.
In my view, the House could and should refer this whole mess to
the procedure and House affairs committee for full and proper in‐
vestigation. As much as some of the reactions of the media have re‐
ferred to some secret external review, it has been completely un‐
contested in the reporting that this review has never considered any
of the partisan revelations that have come to light.
To that end, we should bear in mind the words of Mr. Speaker
Milliken's February 1, 2002 ruling, at page 8582 of the Debates,
where he said:
...in view of the gravity of the matter, I have concluded that the situation before
us where the House is left with two versions of events is one that merits further
consideration by an appropriate committee, if only to clear the air.
Surely, when it appears that perhaps one side is not aligned with
this, all sides should agree that the air needs to be cleared here.
That is why the Conservatives last week asked for the Liberals to
release all correspondence and records they had with the clerk so
we could see whether the allegations were true or just how big that
pipeline was, yet the Liberals have not been forthcoming to this
point, which speaks volumes. That is why stronger tools are now
needed to clear the air.
A parliamentary committee is a strong vehicle to do just that, as
Mr. Speaker Milliken ruled on October 15, 2001, at page 6085 of
Debates:
There is a body that is well equipped to commit acts of inquisition, and that is
the Standing Committee on Procedure and House Affairs, which has a fearsome
chairman, quite able to extract information from witnesses who appear before the
committee, with the aid of the capable members who form that committee of the
House.
The House must stand up for its own dignity and self-respect. If
you find a prima facie case of privilege, Mr. Speaker, I am pre‐
pared, as I said earlier, to move the appropriate motion for a com‐
mittee study. This is the only way, I am afraid, that the cloud can be
cleared and these foundation-shaking allegations can be either con‐
firmed or purged so we can get to the real business of Parliament.
36 COMMONS DEBATES November 23, 2021
Privilege
● (1625)
[Translation]
The Speaker: The hon. member for Saint-Jean on a point of or‐
der.
Ms. Christine Normandin (Saint-Jean, BQ): Mr. Speaker, I
will be brief. I want to pick up on what my colleague from Calgary
Nose Hill said. She talked about people who worked on Parliament
Hill, people who chose to dedicate themselves to serving democra‐
cy. They deserve a safe workplace free from inappropriate be‐
haviour, bullying and harassment. We owe them that much. As to
the point of order, we owe it to ourselves too. These people support
our work as parliamentarians. They are the ones who support us as
we exercise our parliamentary privilege. That is what this is about.
Regarding the allegations that were made, we believe it would be
appropriate for the Board of Internal Economy to investigate. We
have talked about this. We have to be able to determine whether
measures were implemented to punish the subjects of harassment
complaints. The Board of Internal Economy has a mission and au‐
thority under the Parliament of Canada Act, the Standing Orders of
the House of Commons and the Parliamentary Employment and
Staff Relations Act, so it must investigate and report to the House.
That is the only way for us to ensure that the authorities who
have the power to act in such circumstances, namely, the Privy
Council, the Prime Minister and you, Mr. Speaker, in your capacity
as Speaker of the House and chair of the Board of Internal Econo‐
my, acted promptly. We need to know how those authorities applied
the appropriate measures to be apprised quickly of the allegations,
to stop the unacceptable behaviours and, if need be, to punish the
perpetrators.
In conclusion, we would like the Board of Internal Economy to
be given the mandate to investigate and report to the House as
quickly as possible.
[English]
The Speaker: The hon. member for Calgary Nose Hill.
Hon. Michelle Rempel Garner: Mr. Speaker, I would like to
add to my colleague's argument with additional evidence. It is not
allegations, but additional rational. I would like to argue that the
Board of Internal Economy is not, in fact, the place to have this
happen.
Adding to the argument of my colleague from Barrie—Innisfil, I
would argue that my privilege as a member has been breached here,
because it is arguably not safe to work here. The allegations that
have surfaced could be put into two silos. There are other silos, but
these are the ones I want to address.
The first silo is that there is a toxic workplace culture in House
administration, and there was no appropriate vehicle by which to
air that problem and have appropriate human resources' actions tak‐
en. That is very clear by the CBC report. Given that, moving that
review into private under the auspices of the person by which the
allegations are levelled is completely inappropriate by any human
resources standard. The process that we have to deal with a circum‐
stance like this, respectfully, would be PROC, or referred to a com‐
mittee for study.
The second silo that I would argue with respect to it not being
safe to work here is that there were serious allegations that came to
light about a former staff member against a former member of Par‐
liament wherein she stated in reports that House administration
steered her toward mediation when she felt that a full complaint
was warranted. That flies directly in the face of the Board of Inter‐
nal Economy's policy on workplace harassment. In fact, members
can find it on page 12. House administration should never have
steered a complainant toward an example.
Given the fact that there are allegations of toxic workplace cul‐
ture within House administration that the human resources depart‐
ment is part of—
● (1630)
Hon. Mark Holland: Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Is
this what we are doing? Are we hearing evidence on this case? I am
hearing the member opposite posit a number of different items that
she is stating as fact that, again, there is no opportunity to respond
to or hear other evidence of. Is this what we are doing? I just want
to understand what the ruling is in this matter.
The Speaker: I will come back to the House with a ruling. I
have made a commitment to bring this to the Board of Internal
Economy to get down to the bottom of it one way or another. I
think that is a fair offer. I want to bring that to the board, find out
what is going on and then come back with a ruling before that. I
just need some time to process it.
We have points of order all over. We will go to the hon. member
for Banff—Airdrie and then come back to the member for Calgary
Nose Hill.
Mr. Blake Richards: Mr. Speaker, I appreciate and know that
your intentions here are good, that you are looking to find a way to
resolve the matter, and that is appreciated. I know that is important
to you as well.
If what I am hearing is right, the member is trying to make the
arguments and make the case that she believes there is another av‐
enue that should be taken. I do think it is important for you, before
making a ruling, to hear her out and hear why she believes there is
a different avenue that should be taken. I hope she does not intend
speak at great length, but it is important that we hear her arguments
for why another avenue is the better alternative. It is important that
you hear that, Mr. Speaker, before making a ruling.
The Speaker: If the hon. member for Calgary Nose Hill can
make her point, then I will take it into consideration and come back
to the House with a ruling.
The hon. member for Calgary Nose Hill.
November 23, 2021 COMMONS DEBATES 37
Privilege
Hon. Michelle Rempel Garner: Mr. Speaker, I do not feel the
Board of Internal Economy, which is largely a closed-door process,
is appropriate to deal with the breach of privilege that I am raising
today. My privilege is breached because it is not safe to work here
by virtue of other people not finding it safe to work here. Frankly, I
have raised this issue in numerous forms over the entirety of my
decade in this place. A decade into working here, I still do not feel
like it is safe to work here.
With respect, I do not think shunting this issue into a closed-door
committee, when there are people at home who have not had jus‐
tice, is appropriate. I just cannot stress this enough.
I would argue that should an open-door process find it appropri‐
ate to review personnel decisions or new processes in House ad‐
ministration through the Board of Internal Economy, that this is a
route we should take. However, at this point in time, be it within
political parties of all stripes in this place but certainly now within
the House itself, there are no assurances for anybody coming for‐
ward with harassment that this will be taken seriously. This has to
be done not in a closed-door committee, but in an appropriate par‐
liamentary committee. That is the only way this will be addressed.
My privilege, and all our privileges, are breached, because we
are doing the emotional labour of dealing with unwanted touching,
sexual harassment and workplace harassment instead of doing our
jobs, and that is the definition of privilege being breached. It has to
be done outside of the Board of Internal Economy, and light has to
be shone on this.
I do not want to be doing this. I want to be talking about other
things today, but I am tired of this. Therefore, on the 100th anniver‐
sary of women being elected in Parliament, we should not shunt
this to a closed-door committee. We should put it out in public. I
beg that of you, Mr. Speaker.
[Translation]
Mr. Peter Julian (New Westminster—Burnaby, NDP): Mr.
Speaker, as you mentioned earlier, we agree that this is a very seri‐
ous matter. We are talking about issues pertaining to human re‐
sources, how our employees are treated and of course the impartial‐
ity of the House of Commons. All these issues are extremely seri‐
ous and involve serious allegations.
We believe that the Board of Internal Economy is in fact in the
best position to address these matters. These are important matters.
I know that is not lost on you, Mr. Speaker. You have already told
us that you are taking this very seriously. I think all members agree
on that. The Board of Internal Economy is in the best position to
consider these matters, since it is the body responsible for human
resources.
● (1635)
[English]
We are talking about serious allegations. They need to be treated
seriously. We believe the Board of Internal Economy is the right
place to have those discussions that must surely follow the inter‐
ventions today.
The Speaker: I want to thank the hon. members.
I think what we are hearing is partially process. What is going
with the hon. member for Calgary Nose Hill has one implication
and the other one is on a particular case. If members do not mind, I
would not mind taking some time in going over this and returning
with a judgment at some point in, hopefully, the next week. It is
something that takes a lot of time and consideration, so we do the
right thing and not go in the wrong direction and have the wrong
allegations or facts twisted so we end up in the wrong place. All of
us want this place to be safe, and sexual harassment is something
we take very seriously on the Hill.
ACCESS BY MEMBERS TO THE HOUSE OF COMMONS PRECINCT
Mr. Blake Richards (Banff—Airdrie, CPC): Mr. Speaker, I al‐
so rise on a question of privilege. However, as this is my first time
rising in this Parliament, I would like to congratulate you on your
election as Speaker. I know you will face a number of challenges,
as you did in the last Parliament, and that you will handle them
with the same tact, grace and dignity that you always have. Con‐
gratulations from this side of the House on your continuing role in
the chair.
I also want to express my appreciation to the voters of Banff—
Airdrie for giving me another opportunity to represent them in this
place. No matter how many times one is elected to serve, it is al‐
ways an immense honour.
I am rising on a question of privilege that relates to the decision
of the Board of Internal Economy that was announced on the
evening of October 19. I will quote from that decision:
Speaker of the House of Commons and Chair of the Board of Internal Economy,
reports that the Board has determined that, effective Monday, November 22, 2021,
individuals must be fully vaccinated against COVID-19 to be allowed within the
House of Commons Precinct. This requirement will apply to any person who wish‐
es to enter the House of Commons Precinct, including Members....
In media comments the following day, I said that the Conserva‐
tives could not agree to seven members of Parliament, and I was re‐
ferring to the non-Conservative members of the board, meeting in
secret and deciding which of the 338 members of this House, who
had just been elected by Canadians, could enter this chamber to
represent their constituents.
Members will recall that, once upon a time, the Liberals were
boasting about the Board of Internal Economy meetings being open
by default and talking about the great transparency they were going
to bring to them. Instead, in this case, we ended up with a decision
that has very sweeping constitutional implications being made be‐
hind closed doors under a very vague agenda heading referring to
legal employment matters. Frankly, that could have meant practi‐
cally anything to anyone who was looking at the board's website.
38 COMMONS DEBATES November 23, 2021
Privilege
As the board meeting was held in camera, members will appreci‐
ate that I will have to be cautious in what I say about those deliber‐
ations, but one of the traditions of the board is that it operates on a
consensus basis. Votes are, in fact, very rare. I think there have
been fewer than a handful of them in the past decade or two.
There are a lot of good reasons for consensus decision-making at
the board. That model is important there. Not the least of these rea‐
sons is that, when a decision is made, every member of the board
can then go back to his or her caucus and simply explain the deci‐
sion without having to betray the in camera discussions that took
place.
I will say that the opposition House leader and I abstained from
the vote on that board decision, given that we believed that the
board lacked the jurisdiction to limit members' access to parliamen‐
tary proceedings. I am challenging that lack of jurisdiction here to‐
day by way of this question of privilege—
● (1640)
Hon. Mark Holland (Leader of the Government in the House
of Commons, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, the proceedings of the Board of
Internal Economy are in camera, and therefore, the discussions
about votes of the Board of Internal Economy are supposed to simi‐
larly be in camera.
Mr. Warren Steinley (Regina—Lewvan, CPC): Mr. Speaker,
the government House leader has been on his feet several times.
Just because he does not like what opposition members are saying
does not mean that it is not fair. In fact, the member for Banff—
Airdrie made the point that he would not discuss anything that was
in camera at the Board of Internal Economy, so I think he should be
able to continue with his remarks.
The Speaker: I do not want to get involved in the debate. To be
honest, I have just called upon the clerks to ask if reporting on a
vote and how people voted in camera would be a breach.
I will let the hon. member continue. I will listen in, consult and
see where everything is going.
Mr. Blake Richards: Mr. Speaker, I was not attempting to re‐
veal the votes of other members. I was simply indicating that I ab‐
stained from the vote.
I want to make one thing really clear right now. This question of
privilege does not relate in any way to disputing vaccines or their
very vital role in conquering the COVID-19 pandemic. What I am
challenging is the authority of the—
The Speaker: I have consulted with the clerk, and it is a fine
line, but basically the hon. member for Banff—Airdrie is saying
that he did not vote.
There is a fine line between saying what happened in the board
and what did not happen, so I want to caution everyone. What hap‐
pened was in camera. Please keep that in mind.
The hon. member for Banff—Airdrie has the floor.
Mr. Blake Richards: Mr. Speaker, I respect that, and as I have
indicated, I will be cautious.
I want to make it clear that I am questioning the jurisdiction of
the board to be able to make that decision, not the decision itself,
because I do believe vaccines are critically important in conquering
COVID-19. Conservatives have said the entire time that vaccines
are the safest and most effective way to reduce the spread of
COVID-19 and prevent serious illness. We encourage every Cana‐
dian who can to get vaccinated because vaccines are our ticket out
of this wretched pandemic. I want to make that very clear.
This is why we have been so persistent in critiquing the govern‐
ment's efforts in the procurement of vaccines and why we were urg‐
ing the Liberals to ensure more Canadians had access to get jabs in
their arms sooner.
Unlike the Prime Minister, who should be ashamed of himself
for politicizing vaccines and dividing Canadians, Conservatives
abided by all of the public health guidelines during the recent elec‐
tion campaign. This is also why the Leader of the Opposition an‐
nounced—
The Speaker: I want to clarify with the hon. member that we are
getting into a debate. I just want the facts of the case. If he could
stick to that, I would appreciate it.
The hon. member for Banff—Airdrie has the floor.
Mr. Blake Richards: Mr. Speaker, I understand it is as impor‐
tant to establish what it is not about as it is to establish what it is
about, so I will take the point and move on. I think I have made
clear what it is not about. Certainly, it is not about the efficacy or
the importance of vaccines. I will make that clear.
What I am rising about today is this. I believe the Board of Inter‐
nal Economy's decision represents a major breach of the ancient
privileges of the House and in fact could set a very troublesome
precedent.
Following the Prime Minister's lead, some pundits have been
quick to claim that this issue is about some politicians looking out
for their own self-interest, but as pages 59 and 60 of the House of
Commons Procedure and Practice, third edition, remind us:
The privileges of the Commons are designed to safeguard the rights of each and
every elector.
That is critically important, because barely two months ago the
electors it refers to chose the 338 people who sit in the House of
Commons to represent them here.
Page 60 of Bosc and Gagnon quotes from the 20th edition of Er‐
skine May's parliamentary procedure that:
The privileges of Parliament are rights, which are “absolutely necessary for the
due execution of its powers”. They are enjoyed by individual Members because the
House cannot perform its functions without unimpeded use of the services of its
Members.
A similar point is made by Joseph Maingot on page 12 of his
second edition of Parliamentary Privilege in Canada. The privi‐
leges that are implicated by the Board's decision are in fact to be
found among the House's collective rights.
In particular, I point the Speaker to page 59 of Bosc and Gagnon,
which explains:
November 23, 2021 COMMONS DEBATES 39
Privilege
The rights and powers of the House as a collectivity may be categorized as fol‐
lows:
[The] exclusive right to regulate its own internal affairs (including its debates,
proceedings and facilities);
and
[The] right to provide for its proper constitution, including the authority to main‐
tain the attendance and service of its Members.
This right of the House to maintain the attendance and to have
the service of its members finds expression in Standing Order 15,
which states:
Every member, being cognizant of the provisions of the Parliament of Canada
Act, is bound to attend the sittings of the House, unless otherwise occupied with
parliamentary activities and functions or on public or official business.
I underscore that every member is bound to attend the sittings of
the House. Some exceptions are indeed noted, but none of them
suggests this expectation can be waved off by the Board of Internal
Economy.
Bosc and Gagnon, at page 107, state:
In order to fulfill their parliamentary duties members should be able to go about
their parliamentary business undisturbed....
Speakers have consistently upheld the right of the House to the services of its
members free from intimidation, obstruction and interference.
The Standing Committee on Procedure and House Affairs, in its
66th report, presented in April of 1999, elaborated at paragraph 15:
One of the privileges of Members of the House of Commons is a right of unim‐
peded access to Parliament and the parliamentary precincts. Members are entitled to
go about their parliamentary business undisturbed, and cannot be prevented from
entering the chamber or a committee room for a parliamentary proceeding. This
privilege...can be...traced back to at least the early eighteenth century, and is part of
the heritage of all legislative bodies that trace their origins to the British parliamen‐
tary tradition. It is based on the pre-eminent right of the House to the attendance
and service of its Members. Any obstruction of Members constitutes a breach of
privilege and a contempt of the House of Commons.
There can be no doubt that the board's decision constitutes or
purports to be an obstruction to members of the House and their
ability to come here for its sittings, and, once our committees are
struck, potentially for their meetings as well.
That leads me to the comments of Bosc and Gagnon at page 110,
which state:
In circumstances where members claim to be physically obstructed, impeded, in‐
terfered with or intimidated in the performance of their parliamentary functions, the
Speaker is apt to find that a prima facie breach of privilege had occurred. Incidents
involving physical obstruction...either impeding Members' access to the parliamen‐
tary precinct or blocking their free movement within the precinct...have been found
to be prima facie cases of privilege.
Indeed, Bosc and Gagnon, at page 86, remind us that:
The denial of access of members to the parliamentary precinct has been found to
constitute contempt of the House on several occasions.
● (1645)
While those instances typically relate to security activities or
maybe organized protests, for example, the occasions afforded the
procedure and House affairs committee offer several different op‐
portunities to shed light on how critical these rights of the House
actually are.
For example, the committee wrote in its 21st report, tabled in
January 2005, that:
The denial of access to Members of the House—even if temporary—is unac‐
ceptable, and constitutes a contempt of the House. Members must not be impeded
or interfered with while on their way to the chamber or when going about their par‐
liamentary business. To permit this would interfere with the operation of the House
of Commons and undermine the pre-eminent right of the House to the services of its
members.
That report was subsequently concurred in by the House on May
17, 2005.
The procedure and House affairs committee later wrote, this time
in its 26th report, tabled in May of 2012 that:
As part of the parliamentary privilege, Members of the House of Commons have
the right of unimpeded and unfettered access to the parliamentary precincts, and are
entitled to go about their parliamentary duties and functions undisturbed and with‐
out any form of interference.
The same point was made almost word for word by the commit‐
tee in its 34th report presented in March 2015 and in another 34th
report, this time presented in June 2017. In fact, I pause to observe
that I was actually a member of the committee for both of those re‐
ports. It was clear to me, from my participation during those com‐
mittee deliberations, that there was a growing impatience in the
parliamentary community with members being thwarted in their ef‐
forts to come to the House. That is why I was so surprised to see,
only a few years later, the Board of Internal Economy take such a
casual approach to imposing barriers without sufficient accommo‐
dations for MPs being able to come to the chamber.
The earlier attitudes that I have spoken of can be found, for ex‐
ample, in the 2012 report of the procedure and House affairs com‐
mittee, which restated the obligations and expectations of those reg‐
ulating access to Parliament, including this observation:
First, Members of the House of Commons should not, in any case, be denied or
delayed access to the Hill and the precinct when they are known to be Members.
Speaker Regan, in an April 6, 2017, ruling, which would eventu‐
ally lead to the 2017 report that I cited earlier, commented at page
10246 of the Debates. He said:
The importance of the matter of members' access to the precinct, particularly
when there are votes for members to attend, cannot be overstated. It bears repeating
that even a temporary denial of access, whether there is a vote or not, cannot be tol‐
erated.
The 2017 report, meanwhile, noted that:
In line with past precedents, the Committee strongly believes that the right of
unimpeded access for parliamentarians to the parliamentary precinct is of the up‐
most importance and that obstruction or interference with Members engaged in par‐
liamentary business cannot be condoned.
We are left with a trail of precedents, which goes directly to the
right of this House to have the attendance and service of its mem‐
bers. Now, some may say that the board's decision should be upheld
because it is about safety. I agree that in pandemic times it is right
that we should take appropriate precautions. However, that does not
mean the rights of Parliament should just be tossed out, but rather it
is incumbent upon us to find an appropriate balance. Even for phys‐
ical security operations, which I am sure we can all agree are very
important activities around here, it does not mean that Parliament's
rights are expected to yield.
40 COMMONS DEBATES November 23, 2021
Privilege
Mr. Speaker, one of your predecessors, the hon. member for
Regina—Qu'Appelle, in a March 15, 2012, ruling at page 6333 of
the Debates, indeed made the point that “...the implementation of
security measures cannot override the right of members to unfet‐
tered access to the parliamentary precinct, free from obstruction or
interference.”
Earlier, I mentioned that the House itself also has rights to con‐
trol its own internal affairs. Bosc and Gagnon, for example, com‐
ment on page 122 that:
It is well established that, by extension, the House has complete and sole author‐
ity to regulate and administer its precinct, without outside interference, including
controlling access to the buildings.
The authorities are also clear that these rights may be reconciled
when they conflict with members' rights to come here to represent
their constituents. Indeed, that is where the balancing act that I am
suggesting comes into play.
● (1650)
For their part, Bosc and Gagnon, at pages 87 and 88, note:
...the individual Member’s rights are subordinate to those of the House as a
whole...is extremely rare, however, that the rights of the House collectively will
be used to override those of an individual.
Maingot adds, at pages 13 and 14:
While it will be seen that the Member enjoys all the immunity necessary to per‐
form his parliamentary work, this privilege or right...is nevertheless subject to the
practices and procedures of the House.
The real crux of the question before us, then, is who has the
proper and lawful authority to impose limits or controls on those in‐
dividual rights. Perhaps I could offer an analogy.
I am standing here today in a suit and tie, partly because, accord‐
ing to the customs and usual practices of the House, I must do so in
order to be recognized to speak. If I were to take my tie off, Mr.
Speaker, you would not recognize me and I could not speak, yet I
would not suggest that my rights were breached.
The difference between the tie requirement in my analogy and
the vaccine requirement of the board is that one is the established
practice of the House and the other was decided by some outside
body and imposed on all MPs. Yes, that outside body might be
composed of MPs, but it does not constitute all MPs and therefore
cannot be the House.
Parliament and even judicial authorities recognize that the con‐
trol of the precinct vests in the House and, on its behalf, the Speak‐
er.
Madam Justice Charron, for a unanimous Ontario Court of Ap‐
peal in the 1999 Zündel v. Boudria decision, held, at paragraph 18:
In my view, it should be self-evident that control over the premises occupied by
the House of Commons for the purpose of performing the Members' parliamentary
work is a necessary adjunct to the proper functioning of Parliament. Surely, some‐
one must be in control of the premises. Who better than the Speaker, who historical‐
ly has exercised this control for the House? In my view, the courts would be over‐
stepping legitimate constitutional bounds if they sought to interfere with the power
of the House to control access to its own premises.
Notice that Madam Justice Charron referred to the House and the
Speaker, and not to the Board of Internal Economy and the chair of
the board.
I will be as brief as I can, Mr. Speaker, but there are a number of
things that I have to address to ensure that you can properly make
the ruling based on what is and is not.
Mr. Speaker Milliken, May 10, 2006, at page 1189 of the De‐
bates, remarked:
...it is my role as Speaker to protect the House's control over its premises and to
protect the access of members to these premises...
Mr. Speaker Regan, in his April 6, 2017 ruling, noted at page
10245 of the Debates:
As Speaker, it is my role to ensure that the privileges of the House and the indi‐
vidual privileges of members are protected, including that of freedom from obstruc‐
tion; for it is that privilege of unfettered access to the parliamentary precinct which
ensures that members are able to discharge their responsibilities as elected represen‐
tatives.
It is worth bearing in mind, of course, the words also of Bosc and
Gagnon, at page 317, that the Speaker is the chief servant of the
House, and that it is your responsibility, Mr. Speaker, “to act as the
guardian of the rights and privileges of Members and of the House
as an institution.”
The Speaker of the House also, of course, serves as the ex officio
chair of the Board of Internal Economy, but that is, I would suggest
to you, a different legal and constitutional capacity that you have as
Speaker.
Indeed, the November 2 Globe and Mail article describes a dis‐
tinction between these two roles, with particular regard to the board
decision I am speaking about today, based on an interview with
you, Mr. Speaker. It states:
In his defence, [the Speaker] said he only chairs the board and decisions, includ‐
ing that one, are made by MPs who sit on the board.
That is to say that the Speaker, when acting as chair of the Board
of Internal Economy, is not acting directly in his or her constitu‐
tional capacity as the guardian of the House's rights and privileges
or as the House's delegate for managing the precinct. In any event,
on the basis of that Globe and Mail interview, it is fair to say that
the chair of the board's October 19 meeting certainly did not see it
otherwise. Since you, Mr. Speaker, distanced yourself from owner‐
ship of the board's decision, the question becomes whether the
board itself has the authority.
● (1655)
In my respectful opinion, the Board of Internal Economy simply
does not have the statutory authority or the delegated authority
from the House to make a decision like this one with such sweeping
implications. If members will allow me, I would like to talk about
what some of those implications are. I will do it as briefly as I can.
Section 52.3 of the Parliament of Canada Act prescribes the
board's authority: “The Board shall act on all financial and adminis‐
trative matters respecting (a) the House of Commons, its premises,
its services and its staff; and (b) the members of the House of Com‐
mons.”
November 23, 2021 COMMONS DEBATES 41
Privilege
This is an important part of the argument. In my respectful view,
those administrative matters concern items like staffing policies, of‐
fice use guidelines, IT regulations and things like that. They do not
touch upon the procedural concerns of the chamber. The former se‐
nior legal counsel of the House, Steve Chaplin, shared that view in
a recent interview with the National Post, when he commented,
“There is no business or jurisdiction for the Board to interfere with
the proceedings in the House, including members’ attendance and
participation.... Privileges are constitutional and, at the end of the
day, the independence of the House to carry out its functions and
how this is done is for the House to decide.”
Indeed, I would submit to members the background to the adop‐
tion of section 52.3 bears out that interpretation, and I just want to
share that background. It originated from the recommendation in
the fourth report of the Special Committee on the Review of the
Parliament of Canada Act, often known as the Danis committee.
That report was presented to and concurred in by the House on June
1, 1990. The context of paragraph (b) concerning members of the
House is explained by the Danis committee at page—
● (1700)
The Speaker: I will interrupt the hon. member.
I believe I have enough information to determine whether it is a
prima facie case, and I will get back to the House.
I want to thank the hon. member for the very detailed presenta‐
tion, and a case that has been made. I just want to say that I believe
I have enough details and enough facts there. I do not need any
more. If he wants to just wrap it up in 30 seconds we will move on,
and the hon member for Salaberry—Suroît would like to comment
on that as well.
Mr. Blake Richards: Mr. Speaker, I do believe there are, in fact,
other elements that I wanted to touch on, and I intended to do it as
briefly as I could, but I will respect the Speaker's ruling, as I must.
I am thankful for the chance to wrap up, because I think it is im‐
portant that I have this opportunity to at least indicate what I see as
a potential remedy in this situation. If you were to find a prima fa‐
cie case of privilege, I would then have other arguments I should
make.
However, we are still in the midst of a pandemic. I think we all
hope we are in the home stretch of it, so action is certainly neces‐
sary. That is why I would not propose that we refer this issue to the
procedure and House affairs committee for a time-consuming study
or for analysis. Similarly, I would not want to waste our time pro‐
nouncing the board, the Speaker, the Parliamentary Protective Ser‐
vice or anyone else in contempt of the House over this situation.
Time and action are of the essence here. If you find a prima facie
case, I intend to put forward a motion that would allow the House
directly to pronounce itself on a vaccination or test mandate for
members to access the precinct. I think this is a balance we can
strike.
In closing, I would urge that the Speaker find that the board deci‐
sion represents a breach of the House's rights to control its own in‐
ternal affairs and to have the attendance and services of its mem‐
bers, because of the obstruction imposed upon the members' rights
to unfettered access throughout the precinct.
There is an argument to be made that this could be, in fact, an
academic debate, given that all members are vaccinated and have
access to the precinct, but I do not think that it is academic, because
it is precedent that we are talking about here, as well.
These are very weighty and very serious concerns with very seri‐
ous public safety and also constitutional implications. I know it is
important that we have a ruling on this, whether it is seen as aca‐
demic in the current context or not.
I know you will certainly do what is right by the House, and I
look forward to the opportunity to put forward such a motion to
find that appropriate balance.
The Speaker: I want to thank the hon. member. I believe we
have a number of different comments on this one as well. We will
go to the hon. member for Salaberry—Suroît, followed by the hon.
member for New Westminster—Burnaby and then over to the gov‐
ernment House leader.
[Translation]
Mrs. Claude DeBellefeuille (Salaberry—Suroît, BQ): Mr.
Speaker, I would like to share certain points that we believe must
be considered with regard to the question of privilege raised by the
chief opposition whip.
I would first like to say that the decision made by the Board of
Internal Economy concerning vaccination of people on Parliament
Hill was necessary and vital given the COVID-19 pandemic. As the
administrative body of the House of Commons, it is evident that the
Board of Internal Economy acted responsibly and in the interest of
all by adopting this health measure proposed by scientists, which is
proving to be very effective in overcoming the pandemic.
It is important to point out what motivated the board to require
that those entering the parliamentary precinct be vaccinated. Need I
remind the House that COVID-19 is responsible for the loss of
thousands of lives nationwide?
As of early November, the death toll was almost 12,000 in Que‐
bec, almost 30,000 in Canada and more than five million around
the world.
We have a duty to reflect on the issues that have been generated
and magnified by the pandemic, and we have a duty to do what is
needed to address them. This is what we were elected to do. We
must be sensible in carrying out our parliamentary duties in order to
protect our democracy as much as possible for the good of society,
for everyone here and for our children.
42 COMMONS DEBATES November 23, 2021
Privilege
There is broad consensus among scientists that vaccination is one
of the best ways to get through this pandemic, and we need to set
an example. We have a duty to keep Parliament running so that we
can do the legislative work we were elected to do. The parliamen‐
tary privilege that each one of us enjoys is offset by this duty.
The decision regarding proof of vaccination and access to the
parliamentary precinct for members and their staff is a purely ad‐
ministrative one that we believe falls under the jurisdiction of the
Board of Internal Economy. The authors of the third edition of
House of Commons Procedure and Practice state on page 304 that
the “powers and authority of the Board flow from provisions of the
Parliament of Canada Act, the Standing Orders of the House of
Commons, and the Parliamentary Employment and Staff Relations
Act.” According to section 52.3 of the Parliament of Canada Act,
the Board of Internal Economy “shall act on all financial and ad‐
ministrative matters respecting (a) the House of Commons, its
premises, its services and its staff; and (b) the members of the
House of Commons.”
It is therefore clear that the Board of Internal Economy can make
administrative decisions that it deems are in the best interest of the
House of Commons in order to ensure that parliamentary work can
be done properly. It is in the very nature of an organization,
whether it be public or private, to make decisions regarding the
health measures to be implemented, taking into account public
health recommendations and provincial government orders, in order
to ensure the well-being of the organization and to protect staff,
clients and service providers.
It is clear that the Board of Internal Economy has not only the
power to require double vaccination on Parliament Hill but also,
and most importantly, the duty to make the decision to add this
public health measure to the other public health measures it has im‐
plemented over the past year. I would also point out that the Board
of Internal Economy is an extension of the House of Commons.
The Board of Internal Economy's composition ensures it remains
non-partisan and balances the interests of the government and the
opposition parties. The decision made by the majority of its mem‐
bers was made in accordance with the usual practices and the statu‐
tory and regulatory authorities.
It is worth noting that, in 2013, at the request of the House, the
Standing Committee on Procedure and House Affairs considered
whether to replace the Board of Internal Economy with an indepen‐
dent oversight body. The committee concluded that the Board's
structure and mandate, as we know them, “is the most appropriate
model”. In our view, therefore, the Board of Internal Economy has
the legitimacy to take action on such matters.
The official opposition is suggesting that the Board of Internal
Economy's decision regarding the vaccination of MPs on Parlia‐
ment Hill is a violation of parliamentary privilege.
● (1705)
We should consider the particular circumstances resulting from
the pandemic. The decision to require vaccination was made for
public health reasons. In this case, the administrative decision of
the Board of Internal Economy does not in any way breach parlia‐
mentary privilege. Although in other circumstances we might agree
that preventing certain members from accessing the House of Com‐
mons and Parliament Hill would constitute a breach of parliamen‐
tary privilege, the current pandemic leads us to conduct a more nu‐
anced analysis of this privilege.
At this point, we must highlight the intrinsic objectives that led
to the tradition of parliamentary privilege enshrined in the Constitu‐
tion Act, 1867. On the one hand, Bosc and Gagnon say the follow‐
ing on page 75 of the third edition of House of Commons Procedure
and Practice: “The collective privileges of the House of Commons
and the individual privileges of its Members are not unlimited.”
On the other hand, parliamentary privilege does not put the indi‐
vidual rights of members first to the detriment of collective rights
of the House of Commons. The individual privileges of members
when exercising their parliamentary duties should not contradict the
purpose of the House as a deliberative and legislative assembly
working on behalf of democracy.
Tradition and practice dictate that the collective rights of the
House take precedence over the rights of parliamentarians as indi‐
viduals in order to protect Parliament from any abuses by individu‐
al parliamentarians. Is it not the intrinsic purpose of parliamentary
privilege to enable Parliament to do its work?
To determine whether the privilege of unvaccinated members has
been breached, we must ask ourselves whether the repercussions of
their presence on the Hill, due to the fact that they are not vaccinat‐
ed, could hinder the legislative work and deliberations of the House
of Commons.
Allowing members who are not adequately vaccinated onto the
Hill in the middle of a pandemic could have an adverse or even dis‐
astrous effect on the proper functioning of the House in the event of
an outbreak. Favouring the privilege of unvaccinated members
could in fact breach the collective privilege of the House to fully
and adequately carry out its work and hold debates. This would be
contrary to the interests of the public and society, which expect Par‐
liament to operate as the seat of our democracy.
In reality, the purpose of requiring double vaccination is specifi‐
cally to prevent the virus from spreading in Parliament and avoid
having to stop or disrupt parliamentary activities. The Board of In‐
ternal Economy's decision to require members and staff to be vacci‐
nated in order to work on Parliament Hill is entirely legitimate and
necessary.
Furthermore, because the Constitution Act, 1867, refers to the
usages and forms of the House of Commons of the Parliament of
the United Kingdom to determine the extent of the privilege of the
Canadian Parliament, it makes sense to look at whether other Com‐
monwealth parliaments require their members to be vaccinated
against COVID-19, notwithstanding parliamentary privilege.
November 23, 2021 COMMONS DEBATES 43
Privilege
In October, the Australian Parliament became the first Westmin‐
ster government to require that members and staff be vaccinated in
order to enter Parliament. A majority of Australian members adopt‐
ed a motion to that effect in the House. If members do not comply
with the vaccination requirement, they are suspended from the par‐
liamentary precinct until the second sitting day of 2022.
The Scottish Parliament also ruled on vaccination for its mem‐
bers. The July 20, 2021, edition of The Herald reported that, during
deliberations in the House, the Scottish Speaker said that there is
nothing to stop a member from entering the House unless the
House says otherwise. That is essentially what our own Board of
Internal Economy has done.
Mr. Speaker, for all these reasons, we respectfully suggest that
you immediately put the question to see whether the House sup‐
ports the Board of Internal Economy's decision to require vaccina‐
tion on Parliament Hill.
● (1710)
Mr. Peter Julian (New Westminster—Burnaby, NDP): Mr.
Speaker, that action was taken by the Board of Internal Economy. I
agree with my hon. colleague from Salaberry—Suroît who said that
that decision makes sense.
Today we should be thinking about the 30,000 Canadians and
five million people around the world who have died from
COVID‑19. This is a serious pandemic. We have not seen a pan‐
demic this bad in over a century. Appropriate measures are needed
to address this kind of pandemic. That is why I am surprised and
disappointed by the question of privilege raised by my colleague,
the official opposition whip. These decisions really are just com‐
mon sense.
● (1715)
[English]
As we know, this Parliament and previous Parliaments have giv‐
en specific instructions and bylaws to the Board of Internal Econo‐
my. The Board of Internal Economy bylaws that were fixed by Par‐
liament specifically empower the board to “make policy decisions
to govern the use of funds, goods, services and premises provided
for the House, its committees and members”. Those bylaws, which
come from Parliament and parliamentarians themselves, further de‐
fine the premises as “any place provided for the use of the House of
Commons, its committees, and members or the House Administra‐
tion, and any place where the House or any of its committees sits”.
Parliament already gave those powers to the Board of Internal
Economy. The Board of Internal Economy made an important deci‐
sion to ensure the health and safety of members of Parliament, em‐
ployees, whom we must respect at all times, and, most importantly,
the public. There are 338 of us who come from all corners of
Canada. Some of us are from high-transmission zones of COVID
right now. There have been outbreaks in my communities of Burna‐
by and New Westminster, as you are well aware, Mr. Speaker.
Some of us come from areas where there is very low transmission,
but the reality is that all of us coming together into one room leaves
the possibility that we can have transmission from one member of
Parliament to the other, and that member of Parliament can take
COVID back to their region, which may be a low-transmission
zone but could effectively be impacted by the decisions that were
made.
Therefore, the Board of Internal Economy made the decision that
members of Parliament had to be double vaccinated or, in the case
of medical contraindication, subject to regular testing with 48
hours' notice, to ensure they have a negative COVID test. These are
smart policies that were put into place by the Board of Internal
Economy.
I should add that we are asking Canadians now. We know, as
members of Parliament, that when we got on planes, we had to
show our confirmation of double vaccination. When we go to
restaurants in Ottawa, we have to show confirmation of double vac‐
cination. To say that the general public's contribution in the effort
against COVID is showing their double vaccination but that some‐
how members of Parliament should not be inclined to do that just
does not make any sense. We have a responsibility and a duty to
protect the employees of the House of Commons, the House admin‐
istration and everyone else with whom we come into contact.
My final point is that we have a responsibility to lead by exam‐
ple. There are 30,000 Canadians and five million people worldwide
who have died from COVID. We have a responsibility, as members
of Parliament, to lead by example and to ensure that we are show‐
ing the utmost adherence to good, solid public safety recommenda‐
tions. Public health and safety need to be paramount in our minds at
this time, when we have the pandemic and its deadly fourth wave
ravaging certain communities, including mine.
We have an option as well. In this corner of the House, the leader
of the NDP, the member for Burnaby South, has advocated for a hy‐
brid Parliament, to ensure that we have the hybrid tools so that if
any member of Parliament, for whatever reason, is unable to satisfy
the vaccine requirement, if a member of Parliament needs to go into
quarantine, or for any other reason, they can still actively partici‐
pate, support and speak up for their constituents in this House of
Commons. The NDP will continue to advocate for those hybrid
tools to be used during this pandemic.
For all those reasons, I do not see a substance behind a question
of privilege on this basis. It is smart, prudent public policy that was
put into place by the Board of Internal Economy and is something
that should be upheld.
● (1720)
Hon. Mark Holland (Leader of the Government in the House
of Commons, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, as I take my place here yesterday
and today, I cannot help but reflect on how fortunate I am to be
here and thank the good folks of Ajax for sending me to this place
for the sixth time. In returning for the sixth time, I welcome this de‐
bate because it is an opportunity for us to have a discussion on the
nature of privilege.
44 COMMONS DEBATES November 23, 2021
Privilege
Of course, privilege is extended to us not because we are special
but because we hold an important democratic function representing
the people in our ridings. We have a duty, as was just articulated by
the NDP House leader, to lead by example and to use that privilege
for the purpose for which it was intended, to extend the betterment
of Canadian citizens, their health and well-being, and ensure we
comport ourselves in a way that inspires leadership in the rest of the
country.
We hit a big milestone today: 90% of Canadians have at least one
vaccine and over 86% have two. It is a remarkable achievement. It
is remarkable because we have been able to frankly be much less
divisive in our country than we have seen in other places.
Every time we debate this, and is why I lamented being here to‐
day, it makes it harder for that last 10% to get that first shot and
harder for that last 14% to get that shot. It is my sincere hope we
can dispose of this matter and stop talking about it so we can be
united in our desire to see every single Canadian vaccinated so we
can put this whole business of COVID behind us.
I look at this and my problem is really a couple-fold. One would
hold out that the Board of Internal Economy is only seven members
of Parliament. Those members are representatives of their respec‐
tive parties and represent more than 70% of the elected will of the
Canadian people.
Others have spoken about other mandates in place and how we
should expect Parliament to be no different. I would actually say
that this place has an extra special responsibility to make sure ev‐
erybody is vaccinated here, specifically because we are criss-cross‐
ing from every part of the country, convening in this room, meeting
for very long hours and then returning to every part of this country.
This is not the same situation as the local restaurant. There is no
other workplace like this one. Therefore, we have to be even more
careful in how we—
[Translation]
The Speaker: Order. There appears to be a problem with the in‐
terpretation.
Now that the interpretation is working, the hon. Leader of the
Government in the House of Commons.
Hon. Mark Holland: Mr. Speaker, questions of privilege are not
just about individual members; they are about the collective interest
and health of all members. What happens if a member has a health
problem? That is why we are having these in camera discussions at
the Board of Internal Economy. People's personal situations and
health status must be discussed in private.
[English]
We have members in this place who may be immunocompro‐
mised, people who are actually put at very real, elevated risk com‐
pared to others because of a communicable disease. What about
their privilege? I do not hear the Conservative members talking
about the privilege of members who are in that very vulnerable
state.
This place is not just about our privilege. As I stand here, I see
members of the House administration. I see pages. I know there are
people who are doing translation. There are journalists. What about
their health? What about their privilege to have their health protect‐
ed? At what point do we set rules to make sure that the privilege of
an individual does not compromise the safety and health of others?
We know that this chamber is full of rules and full of things that
would infringe upon our individual privilege. The whip spoke about
the fact that I have to wear this tie. He is absolutely right; that is a
rule, and I suppose that is an infringement of my privilege if I did
not feel like wearing a tie. So are dress codes, limited hours and
limited debate. I was just talking to the member for Winnipeg
North, who was telling me a story of a member who walked into
the Manitoba legislature with a knife and had to be told that their
privilege did not include carrying a knife.
There are limits on our privileges in this place. Those limits are
present at all times. I would submit to you, Mr. Speaker, that they
most certainly are present during a pandemic. We are in a public
health crisis. We would expect all workplaces to have these provi‐
sions. I am, frankly, disappointed that we are talking about this, be‐
cause all of these conversations miss the single most important fact,
which is that with unanimity we could have avoided all of this. We
could simply have agreed that vaccines, in this place, on the parlia‐
mentary precinct, are the right thing to do. Instead, we are continu‐
ing to debate this for reasons that frankly, I have to say, are confus‐
ing to me.
If these moral arguments do not hold sway and if the concern of
privilege for others does not hold sway, I will refer specifically to
some items within the Parliament of Canada Act and elsewhere that
demonstrate the Board of Internal Economy's ability to have au‐
thority to decide vaccination requirements within this House.
I would like to draw to the attention of members section 52.3 of
the Parliament of Canada Act, which states, in respect of the func‐
tions of the Board of Internal Economy:
The Board shall act on all financial and administrative matters respecting
(a) the House of Commons, its premises, its services and its staff; and
(b) the members of the House of Commons.
The Board of Internal Economy has a legislated mandate to act
on administrative matters for the House and its members.
I would also like to draw the attention of members to Govern‐
ment Motion No. 1, which the government gave notice of today on
the special Order Paper, and which was shared last week with all
parties. Motion No. 1 directly addresses the matter of ensuring that
members who participate in the deliberation of this House in person
must be fully vaccinated or have a legitimate medical reason for not
being vaccinated. This is a fundamental issue of the collective priv‐
ileges of the House.
● (1725)
[Translation]
I can assure members that this matter will be debated as soon as
possible to send a clear message that the health and safety of mem‐
bers who participate in person are of the utmost importance to the
government members and, by extension, the House.
November 23, 2021 COMMONS DEBATES 45
Privilege
I would point out that not only does the Board of Internal Econo‐
my have the authority to make the sensible decision it has made,
but also this matter will be debated and voted on in the next few
days, which will further resolve the point raised by the opposition
member.
[English]
In closing, I would like to cite a salient point made in the 2014
edition of Erskine May's A treatise on the law, privileges, proceed‐
ings and usage of Parliament, at page 203. It states that certain
rights and immunities, such as freedom from arrest or freedom of
speech, belong primarily to the individual members of each House
and exist because the House cannot perform its functions without
unimpeded use of the services of its members.
It goes on:
Other rights and immunities, such as the power to punish for contempt and the
power to regulate its own constitution, belong primarily to each House as a collec‐
tive body, for the protection of its Members and the vindication of its own authority
and dignity. Fundamentally, however, it is only as a means to the effective discharge
of the collective functions of the House that the individual privileges are enjoyed by
Members.
That last quote is most pertinent to this situation. The question of
the relationship between individual privileges and our collective
privileges is a fundamental issue for this House to determine. That
is precisely what the government is proposing to accomplish
through Government Motion No. 1.
● (1730)
As the last point, even if the party opposite continues to protest
in this way, there is a very simple solution, which the House leader
for the NDP has indicated, and that is an extension of the hybrid
measures which would allow the members who are unvaccinated in
their caucus to participate remotely and do so in a way that is safe
and does not in any way impugn their privilege. They are in the odd
position of disenfranchising their own members by saying they are
both against having this hybrid provision and also having this posi‐
tion on vaccines, which I find strange.
This matter is clear. Absolutely the board has the authority and
collective privilege has to be respected in this place.
Ms. Elizabeth May (Saanich—Gulf Islands, GP): Mr. Speaker,
I speak as a member in a party that does not have a seat on the
Board of Internal Economy to support the decision the Board of In‐
ternal Economy has made.
I speak also as someone who, being in the House for the last two
days, does not feel safe to use the opposition lobby. It is overcrowd‐
ed. Even with masks, we need to maintain physical distance. We
need to be careful. I am particularly vulnerable and feel vulnerable
in that space, because I am not confident that all the other people
sharing it are double vaccinated. We are members of Parliament
from four parties in that space and I feel my privileges to do my
work as a member of Parliament are impeded by not being able to
use the opposition lobby until matters of public health and safety
are completely and rigorously observed in this place.
I speak in support of the member for Salaberry—Suroît, the
member for New Westminster—Burnaby and the hon. government
House leader. This matter should not be burdening us now. We need
to feel that public health measures are rigorously enforced here.
Parenthetically, at COP26, they had strict measures of wearing
masks, keeping physical distancing and every single person,
35,000, did daily COVID lateral flow tests to once again ensure we
were all safe together. We should all support these measures.
Mr. John Brassard: Mr. Speaker, it is clear by the discussions
today that there was a lot of unfinished business in Parliament as a
result of the election and clearly there is new business as well.
When the House began its summer adjournment, the Chair had be‐
fore it a question—
The Speaker: I am sorry. I do not mean to interrupt the hon.
member, but this is a new item not having to do with what we were
discussing.
I will wrap up after the hon. member for Saanich—Gulf Islands
spoke. I will take it under consideration and come back to the
House. I just wanted to wrap that up to ensure it was taken care of.
The hon. member for Barrie—Innisfil can start from the top. My
apologies.
ALLEGED BREACHES OF PRIVILEGE PRESENTED IN THE SECOND REPORT
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ACCESS TO INFORMATION, PRIVACY
AND ETHICS
Mr. John Brassard (Barrie—Innisfil, CPC): Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. This is in relation to a letter and a question of privilege re‐
lated to the 43rd Parliament, which I wrote to you about, and I rise
today just to be perfectly clear.
When the House began its summer adjournment, the Chair had
before it a question of privilege, which the hon. member for
Leeds—Grenville—Thousand Islands and Rideau Lakes had raised
on June 10, with respect to the second report of the Standing Com‐
mittee on Access to Information, Privacy and Ethics that had been
presented to the House that morning. The then government House
leader's parliamentary secretary told the House that he would come
back within a week with a response, but the Liberals remained per‐
fectly silent throughout June.
Before a ruling could be delivered, the Prime Minister called an
unnecessary federal election in pursuit of his own ambitions for
power. By rising today, I am seeking to revive this question of priv‐
ilege.
As you recently heard from my House leader, Mr. Speaker, it is a
well-established principle that one Parliament may address a con‐
tempt that was committed against one of its predecessors. He also
spoke about importance of raising this matter today in keeping with
the spirit of your ruling from last autumn.
Since there has been some turnover in the membership of the
House since June, I will give a recap of the issues raised in the orig‐
inal question of privilege.
Very extensive submissions were put forward on June 10, so I
would refer the Chair to those including—
46 COMMONS DEBATES November 23, 2021
Privilege
The Speaker: Order. The government House leader is rising on
a point of order.
● (1735)
Hon. Mark Holland (Leader of the Government in the House
of Commons, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of order. I was
up earlier on this, but, as this is a matter from the previous Parlia‐
ment that would have concluded at dissolution, I do not believe it
comes forward here. Therefore, I am not opposed to the member
raising it, but I believe it is premature to be doing so here.
I would have to assert that a motion or committee report would
be necessary for this matter to be considered. It is premature. We
are dealing with a lot of matters that are from the previous Parlia‐
ment. I do not believe that members can simply bring matters in
here and avert that process, and I would seek the Speaker's ruling
on such.
The Speaker: I will let the hon. member for Barrie—Innisfil
continue. In the meantime, I will consult with the table to make
sure we are not breaking any rules and that we are following the
proper procedure.
The hon. member for Barrie—Innisfil.
Mr. John Brassard: Mr. Speaker, again, I would refer you, in
keeping with the spirit of your ruling from last autumn, with respect
to these issues. In any event, members can be reassured that my
comments will be much shorter than the two hours or so of submis‐
sions that were made back in June.
On March 25, this House adopted an order requiring the atten‐
dance of three witnesses before the ethics committee: Rick Theis,
the Prime Minister's director of policy and cabinet affairs, was to
appear on March 29; Amitpal Singh, the Deputy Prime Minister's
policy adviser, was to appear on March 31; and Ben Chin, the
Prime Minister's senior adviser, was to appear on April 8. The order
also contemplated that the Prime Minister could appear on behalf of
any or all of those individuals. In the end, as confirmed in appendix
A of the second report, none of them appeared before the ethics
committee.
On page 82 of the House of Commons Procedure and Practice,
third edition, various categories of known contempts of Parliament
are noted, including “without reasonable excuse, failing to attend
before the House or a committee after being summoned to do so”
and “without reasonable excuse, disobeying a lawful order of the
House or a committee”.
Parliamentary Privilege in Canada, second edition, at page 239,
outlines the importance of treating Mr. Theis, Mr. Singh and Mr.
Chin's disregard of the March 25 order of the House as contempt. It
states:
Disobedience to rules or orders represents an affront to the dignity of the House,
and accordingly the House could take action, not simply for satisfaction but to en‐
sure that the House of Commons is held in the respect necessary for its authority to
be vindicated. Without proper respect, the House of Commons could not function.
A moment ago I quoted Bosc and Gagnon's caveat of “without
reasonable excuse”. I would argue that could be addressed very
quickly considering that none of the three witnesses offered any ex‐
cuse for their absences. I do acknowledge that two cabinet minis‐
ters wrote to the ethics committee's chair to indicate they would ap‐
pear on behalf of the witnesses, but that does not constitute an ex‐
cuse from the witnesses personally. In the alternative, I would say it
does not amount to a reasonable excuse.
In the present case, it is quite clear the House adopted an order
and the order was breached completely, since there was no effort by
the witnesses to comply with it in any way, nor was any excuse ad‐
vanced by them to be weighed by the House or for the committee to
assess and report its findings.
I now wish to turn to the government's role in preventing Mr.
Theis, Mr. Singh and Mr. Chin from appearing as witnesses at the
ethics committee. The government has freely admitted to this
course of conduct, both in advance and at the time of the scheduled
appearances. In his remarks to the House on March 25, the then
government House leader said, at page 5234 of the Debates, “I say
here today that ministers will instruct their staff not to appear when
called before committees and that the government will send minis‐
ters instead to account for their actions.”
The Speaker: I am wondering if the hon. member could get to
the point. I am trying to understand how this is applicable to this
Parliament. It sounds like there is an argument for overlap.
I would like to make sure this is something that is applicable to
this Parliament, that we are not arguing a past Parliament, and that
this is pertinent to this Parliament. I am sure the hon. member can
do that.
The hon. member for Barrie—Innisfil.
Mr. John Brassard: Mr. Speaker, as I said at the onset, there
was an opportunity for the government House leader to respond. He
had indicated to Parliament that he would respond within a week of
the question of privilege being presented by the member for
Leeds—Grenville—Thousand Islands and Rideau Lakes. The gov‐
ernment House leader did not respond, and in the spirit of a ruling
that you made last autumn, it was suggested and ruled upon that at
the earliest convenience of the House reconvening, a question of
privilege could be raised from the previous question of privilege.
That is the basis upon which I am presenting this question of privi‐
lege, and I believe, in the spirit of what you decided, that I should
continue with it.
In advance of the committee's March 29 meeting, the then gov‐
ernment House leader sent a letter to the chair of the ethics commit‐
tee, further to his statement to the House the week before, writing,
“Accordingly, Mr. Rick Theis, Director of Policy to the Prime Min‐
ister, has been instructed to not appear before the committee. In his
place, I will attend the meeting on behalf of the government on
Monday, March 29th.”
November 23, 2021 COMMONS DEBATES 47
Privilege
I would add that the ethics committee did not accept the then
government House leader as a substitute witness in satisfaction of
the order. Indeed, the committee, at its March 29 meeting, adopted
a motion that states, “in relation to its study on questions of conflict
of interest and lobbying in relation to pandemic spending, the com‐
mittee invite [the minister] to appear.” He was treated as a separate
witness, invited independently of and without any link to the March
25 House order.
When the then government House leader appeared at the com‐
mittee, he said, at page 13 of the evidence, “Based on the instruc‐
tions I gave the other day, it was clear to Mr. Theis and other indi‐
viduals that they wouldn't appear before committees and would be
replaced by the appropriate ministers.”
The minister even acknowledged, at page 8 of the evidence, that
this was an unsatisfactory arrangement to the majority of the
House, when he said, “I am aware that some of the members of this
committee would rather be hearing from a staff member from the
Prime Minister's Office, Mr. Rick Theis, but as I told the House last
week and I want to make clear again, we fundamentally disagree
with the decision.”
The then associate minister of finance would go on to write the
ethics committee chair similar letters in advance of Mr. Singh's
March 31 scheduled appearance and Mr. Chin's April 8 scheduled
appearance.
A few moments ago, I referred to Bosc and Gagnon itemizing, at
page 82, a list of known contempts of Parliament. I would add the
following two, which have particular bearing here: “interfering
with or obstructing a person who is carrying out a lawful order of
the House or a committee” and “intimidating, preventing or hinder‐
ing a witness from giving evidence or giving evidence in full to the
House or a committee”. Bosc and Gagnon add, at page 1080, “Tam‐
pering with a witness or in any way attempting to deter a witness
from giving evidence may constitute a breach of parliamentary
privilege.”
Quite clearly, Messrs. Theis, Singh and Chin were obstructed,
deterred, prevented from and maybe even hindered in their ability
of carrying out a lawful order of the House of Commons. Parlia‐
ment's right to hear from the witnesses it has chosen, without ob‐
struction, has been consistently asserted, dating back to February
21, 1700, when the English House of Commons adopted a resolu‐
tion that said:
That if it shall appear that any person hath been tampering with any Witness, in
respect of his evidence to be given to this House, or any Committee thereof, or di‐
rectly or indirectly hath endeavoured to deter or hinder any person from appearing
or giving evidence, the same is declared to be a high crime and misdemeanour; and
this House will proceed with the utmost severity against such offender.
Much more recently, in Mr. Speaker Milliken's highly celebrated
ruling on Afghan detainee documents, on April 27, 2010, he made
some less well-remembered comments on witness matters, includ‐
ing, at page 2041 of the Debates, “the procedural authorities are
clear that interference with witnesses may constitute a contempt.”
Beyond the matter of the government's so-called instructions at
page 13 of the ethics committee's March 29 evidence, the then gov‐
ernment House—
● (1740)
Hon. Mark Holland: Mr. Speaker, I am rising on a point of or‐
der.
I will read something that I believe is relevant to this:
All items on the Order Paper including government and private Members’ bills
die. The government’s obligation to provide answers to written questions, to re‐
spond to petitions or to produce papers requested by the House also ends with dis‐
solution.
Committees cease to exist until the House reconstitutes them following the elec‐
tion. All orders of reference expire, and the Chairs and Vice-Chairs of all commit‐
tees cease to hold office. The government is no longer required to provide responses
to committee reports.
I continue to make this point. We have indulged many points that
have crossed the line and have gone on for quite some length.
Again, this is not the place, not the time and not how this should be
dealt with.
● (1745)
Mr. Gérard Deltell (Louis-Saint-Laurent, CPC): Mr. Speaker,
on the point of order raised by my government counterpart, I want
to raise the fact that this is exactly what the Speaker said just two
minutes ago, that we have to address it correctly. He said, quoting
from memory, “I am sure the hon. member can do that.” Let the
member express himself. I am sure he will follow the rules estab‐
lished by the Speaker of the House.
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Chris d'Entremont): I will ask the
member for Barrie—Innisfil to sum up.
Mr. John Brassard: Mr. Speaker, respectfully, it is difficult to
sum up this question of privilege if the facts are not laid out and if
the Chair is not reminded of some of the points that were brought
up.
In the first intervention on this question of privilege as it related
to the previous Parliament, the member for Leeds—Grenville—
Thousand Islands and Rideau Lakes went on for two hours about
this, laying out foundationally where the privilege had been broken.
There is a need, respectfully, to summarize for the Chair exactly
what the basis of this breach of privilege is. I would ask for some
indulgence on this because it would be awfully difficult for me to
go to the back end, as was the previous case, and really lay this out.
I will note that when the explanation was made to the Chair as to
why it was important to lay out these facts in addition to what was
not dealt with in the last Parliament and the Speaker's own spirit of
the ruling that it be presented at the first possible opportunity, that
is precisely what I am doing here. I want to thank the Speaker for
that.
48 COMMONS DEBATES November 23, 2021
Privilege
Much more recently, in Mr. Speaker Milliken's highly celebrated
ruling, which I will repeat because this is the point where I was cut
off, on the Afghan detainee documents on April 27, 2010, he made
some much less well-remembered comments on witness matters,
including at page 2041 of the Debates, where he stated, “the proce‐
dural authorities are clear that interference with witnesses may con‐
stitute a contempt.” Beyond the matter of the government's socalled instructions, at page 13 of the ethics committee's March 29
evidence, the then government House leader made the claim, “min‐
isterial responsibility means that a minister can replace an employ‐
ee who reports to the minister, not to Parliament.” That is just not
so. In fact it is, in my view, a gross misstatement of several consti‐
tutional principles. Ministerial staff enjoy no special status when it
comes to being summoned as a witness.
Page 981 of Bosc and Gagnon states quite clearly, “The Standing
Orders place no explicit limitation on this power. In theory, it ap‐
plies to any person on Canadian soil.” While very limited cate‐
gories of persons do have immunity from appearing, the Law Clerk
and Parliamentary Counsel advanced the point that there is no im‐
munity for political staff when they appeared before the ethics com‐
mittee on April 12 and the committee thought fit, in appendix A of
its second report, to include a summary of the evidence:
Mr. Dufresne stated that political staff and public servants have no immunity, by
virtue of their positions, from requests to testify before parliamentary committees.
He also suggested that the topics of discussion and the different roles that ministers
and political staff play have been factors for deciding which person is the more ap‐
propriate witness to testify on a given topic.
In 2013, the United Kingdom Parliament's joint committee on
parliamentary privilege considered a government green paper on
parliamentary privilege, which, among other things, asked—
The Speaker: The hon. member has done very detailed work
and it is very much appreciated, but at this point we are trying to
establish whether there is a prima facie case. I would ask the hon.
member to be more concise and let us know exactly what he is
looking for and then we can rule on it.
The hon. member for Barrie—Innisfil.
Mr. John Brassard: Mr. Speaker, I will refer you to the twohour presentation from the member for Leeds—Grenville—Thou‐
sand Islands and Rideau Lakes. I will also, with respect, sum up
what the prima facie case is here.
It is my respectful submission that seven prima facie contempts
have been made here: One concerns each of the three witnesses
who failed to appear before the ethics committee, one concerns the
government's instructions to each of the three witnesses to disobey
an order of the House of Commons and, finally, one concerns the
misleading or prevaricating evidence given by the member for Wa‐
terloo to the two committees.
I had not had an opportunity until this point to lay that out. I will
again, Mr. Speaker, refer you to the member for Leeds—
Grenville—Thousand Islands and Rideau Lakes.
I have presented two questions of privilege today. In fact, I be‐
lieve that my privilege as a member to present these points of privi‐
lege has been violated. I have been interrupted many times during
circumstances where I have been presenting very factually the cas‐
es as they related to the previous question of privilege and to this
question of privilege.
I will turn to you, Mr. Speaker, as the guardian of the rights and
privileges of this Parliament because I know that a lot rests on your
shoulders. My grievances here are not some partisan Liberal or
Conservative dispute. They are far more fundamental than that. For
those at the heart of the balance between the legislature and the ex‐
ecutive in this case, it is about more than party politics. The cen‐
turies of parliamentary and constitutional evolution to which we are
the inheritors centre on the struggle between the King and parlia‐
ment. In the end, parliamentary supremacy was established as a
bedrock principle of our democracy. From time to time, we are
called upon to speak up for and defend these ancient but utterly
critical principles of the democratic system that we enjoy as Cana‐
dians. I know that you will make the right decision in this case.
As uncomfortable as these situations are for the government, it is
paramount that we defend our democracy and that we defend our
democratic institutions. You are the guardian of that, Mr. Speaker.
It is for that reason I rise today, not just on the other issue, but on
this one as well. I ask that you defend those principles.
● (1750)
[Translation]
Ms. Christine Normandin: Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask you
to be kind enough to remind me that a member does not need to in‐
voke the right of reply to speak in the future. However, if such is
not the case, then I would like to invoke the right of reply for the
Bloc Québécois.
The Speaker: I thank the member. We have taken note of that.
[English]
Mr. Matthew Green (Hamilton Centre, NDP): Mr. Speaker, it
is an honour and a privilege to be here representing my constituents
of Hamilton Centre who have imbued me with this very serious du‐
ty of coming to the House of Commons to exercise our parliamen‐
tary privileges: ones that have been outlined by the hon. member
for Barrie—Innisfil as perhaps being in question or under attack. A
lot has been said on many of these questions of privilege here to‐
day.
I want to congratulate you on your preferment, and I would share
that when we elected you yesterday, Mr. Speaker, we did so know‐
ing that we were trying to set a direction for the course of this 44th
Parliament that would respect the rights and privileges of every
member present in the House.
November 23, 2021 COMMONS DEBATES 49
Privilege
In trying to learn more about these privileges, I have turned to
the jurisprudence, much in the same way my colleagues have, refer‐
encing Derek Lee's The Power of Parliamentary Houses to Send
for Persons, Papers and Records: A Sourcebook on the Law of
Precedent of Parliamentary Subpoena Powers for Canadian and
other Houses. I am sure it is on the Speaker's shelf, along with a
long list of other jurisprudence that goes back to the 1600s and pro‐
tects our rights and assures that in this Westminster parliamentary
system, we have a balance of power on both sides of the House.
I rise as a New Democrat and think this is an important consider‐
ation for your priority, Mr. Speaker, when setting the tone for this
44th Parliament because the Liberal government did have a pen‐
chant for circumventing the rules and, in many cases, violating the
parliamentary privileges of members of the House of Commons.
That has been outlined seven times in this particular question of
privilege, three times previously in other points, and multiple times
in the last session of Parliament, when you had to intervene in legal
proceedings, which was unprecedented.
With this particular case, as committees are being struck it is go‐
ing to be especially important for you, Mr. Speaker, to provide a
clear ruling to show the government and the opposition how seri‐
ously we are going to take the jurisprudence on our parliamentary
privilege. Because we had a government that chose to run out the
clock on the last session, to prorogue it and use procedures to frus‐
trate the basic application of our parliamentary privileges, I believe
we would be better off if this was prioritized in a ruling brought
forward that clearly defends, with proper evidence, the right for us
to use our subpoenas, and to send for documents and records as has
been accorded through the historical practices and usages of the
House.
Without getting into details or arguing the points and principles
of this particular case, I would suggest that this case ought to be
used as a precedent for future potential circumventions of our privi‐
lege.
I will state in closing that a precedent will be set either way, be‐
cause a non-decision in this case is also a precedent. It will actually
reward, in some instances, the government side's behaviour of cir‐
cumventing what is, I think, a very clear and well-laid-out longstanding tradition of respecting our parliamentary privileges.
With that, I rise as a member of the New Democratic Party in
support of the hon. member for Barrie—Innisfil. I ask that you put
express priority particularly on the matter of principle and privilege
that has been raised today, because it will send a message to the
government about what it is able to get away with in the months to
come. I look forward to the Speaker's very learned decision on the
matter.
● (1755)
The Speaker: I want to thank the hon. members for their input
and their information. I will be returning to the House with a judg‐
ment as soon as possible.
[Translation]
ACCESS BY MEMBERS TO THE HOUSE OF COMMONS PRECINCT
Mrs. Claude DeBellefeuille (Salaberry—Suroît, BQ): Mr.
Speaker, I would like to share with you a major concern that my
Bloc Québécois colleagues and I share regarding the health and
safety of members of the House and parliamentary staff. This con‐
cern is a direct result of the Conservative Party's lukewarm position
on whether it is effective and necessary for its members to be vacci‐
nated against COVID‑19.
Since the Board of Internal Economy made its decision to require
those on Parliament Hill to be double vaccinated, the Conservative
Party has been keeping the public and parliamentarians in the dark
by refusing to disclose whether its members have been vaccinated.
The Leader of the Opposition stated that all of his members
would be in the House of Commons since they were vaccinated or
had medical exemptions. However, he is refusing to say how many
members have exemptions.
Science and public health officials are requiring people to be
vaccinated in order to have access to many public places across the
country, and they keep saying that the best way to protect against
the spread of COVID‑19 is for the vast majority of the population
to be properly vaccinated.
Rumours have been going around since yesterday that about onethird of the Conservative members produced vaccine exemptions to
be allowed on the Hill without being vaccinated. Seeing as how we
are in a pandemic, the Conservative Party's refusal to disclose its
members' vaccination status makes no sense in our view.
We believe every member of Parliament who has made the re‐
sponsible choice to get vaccinated to protect the lives and health of
their fellow citizens, their loved ones and their colleagues has the
right to know which parliamentarians are not adequately vaccinated
so they can keep their distance to avoid being infected and poten‐
tially infecting others.
We think this secrecy on the part of the official opposition is to‐
tally irresponsible and a direct violation of the House's parliamen‐
tary privilege. This seems like a good time to remind the House that
the ultimate aim of parliamentary privilege is to ensure that the
House of Commons can conduct its proceedings effectively and get
its democratic work done.
In accordance with tradition and practice, the collective privilege
of the House takes precedence over the parliamentary privilege of
individual MPs. The reason for that is to protect Parliament from
any abuses by individual parliamentarians.
According to a Library of Parliament note dated November 12 on
mandatory immunization and parliamentary privilege, the ultimate
purpose of parliamentary privilege is to enable the institution to do
its work.
Allowing members who are not fully vaccinated on the Hill be‐
cause they have submitted a medical exemption directly contradicts
the Board of Internal Economy's goal of making Parliament Hill a
safe place for people to work.
50 COMMONS DEBATES November 23, 2021
Privilege
Allowing unvaccinated members to access Parliament Hill un‐
dermines the health and safety of all members and our fellow citi‐
zens. It poses a real risk to both public health and the proper func‐
tioning of the House of Commons.
Parliamentary privilege must not in any way include the ability
to jeopardize the health of other members or their ability to work. It
is one thing for elected officials to renounce exemplary health prac‐
tices, but it is quite another for them to renounce precaution, espe‐
cially if it means putting their colleagues and the employees of the
House at risk. This would be incredibly irresponsible.
Therefore we are asking that the House order the House Admin‐
istration and the Board of Internal Economy, which oversees the
House Administration, to take the measures required to rectify the
situation and ensure that all members present on Parliament Hill are
adequately vaccinated to ensure the health and safety of the House.
● (1800)
The Speaker: I would like to thank the hon. member for her pro‐
posal. I will come back to the House with a ruling shortly.
[English]
Hon. Mark Holland (Leader of the Government in the House
of Commons, Lib.) moved:
That the House do now adjourn.
The Speaker: Is it the pleasure of the House to adopt the mo‐
tion?
Some hon. members: Agreed.
(Motion agreed to)
[Translation]
The Speaker: The House stands adjourned until tomorrow at
2 p.m. pursuant to Standing Order 24(1).
(The House adjourned at 6:03 p.m.)
CONTENTS
Tuesday, November 23, 2021
Opening of Parliament
The Speaker ............................................... 15
Order Paper
The Speaker ............................................... 15
Oaths of Office
Mr. Trudeau................................................ 15
Bill C-1. Introduction and first reading.................... 15
(Motions deemed adopted and bill read the first time) ... 15
Speech from the Throne
The Speaker ............................................... 15
Mr. Trudeau................................................ 19
Motion ..................................................... 19
(Motion agreed to)......................................... 19
Business of Supply
Mrs. Fortier ................................................ 19
Motion ..................................................... 19
(Motion agreed to)......................................... 19
SPEECH FROM THE THRONE
Address in Reply
Mr. Hanley................................................. 19
Motion ..................................................... 22
Ms. Lantsman.............................................. 22
Mr. Garon.................................................. 22
Ms. Collins (Victoria) ..................................... 22
Mr. Williams............................................... 23
Ms. Sinclair-Desgagné .................................... 23
Mrs. Chatel ................................................ 23
Mrs. Vien .................................................. 25
Mr. Villemure.............................................. 26
Ms. Idlout.................................................. 26
Mrs. Kramp-Neuman ...................................... 26
Mr. O'Toole ................................................ 26
Motion ..................................................... 27
(Motion agreed to)......................................... 27
Privilege
Alleged Non-compliance with an Order of the House
Mr. Deltell ................................................. 27
Mr. Therrien ............................................... 31
Mr. Holland................................................ 32
Mr. Davies................................................. 32
Ms. May (Saanich—Gulf Islands)......................... 32
Allegations Concerning the Clerk of the House
Mr. Brassard ............................................... 32
Mr. Holland................................................ 33
Ms. Rempel Garner........................................ 33
Mr. Richards............................................... 34
Ms. Normandin ............................................ 36
Mr. Julian .................................................. 37
Access by Members to the House of Commons
Precinct
Mr. Richards............................................... 37
Mr. Holland................................................ 38
Mr. Steinley................................................ 38
Mrs. DeBellefeuille........................................ 41
Mr. Julian .................................................. 43
Mr. Holland................................................ 43
Ms. May (Saanich—Gulf Islands)......................... 45
Alleged Breaches of Privilege Presented in the Second
Report of the Standing Committee on Access to
Information, Privacy and Ethics
Mr. Brassard ............................................... 45
Mr. Holland................................................ 46
Mr. Deltell ................................................. 47
Mr. Green .................................................. 48
Access by Members to the House of Commons
Precinct
Mrs. DeBellefeuille........................................ 49
Mr. Holland................................................ 50
Motion ..................................................... 50
(Motion agreed to)......................................... 50
Published under the authority of the Speaker of
the House of Commons
Publié en conformité de l’autorité
du Président de la Chambre des communes
SPEAKER’S PERMISSION PERMISSION DU PRÉSIDENT
The proceedings of the House of Commons and its commit‐
tees are hereby made available to provide greater public ac‐
cess. The parliamentary privilege of the House of Commons
to control the publication and broadcast of the proceedings of
the House of Commons and its committees is nonetheless re‐
served. All copyrights therein are also reserved.
Les délibérations de la Chambre des communes et de ses
comités sont mises à la disposition du public pour mieux le
renseigner. La Chambre conserve néanmoins son privilège
parlementaire de contrôler la publication et la diffusion des
délibérations et elle possède tous les droits d’auteur sur
celles-ci.
Reproduction of the proceedings of the House of Commons
and its committees, in whole or in part and in any medium,
is hereby permitted provided that the reproduction is accu‐
rate and is not presented as official. This permission does not
extend to reproduction, distribution or use for commercial
purpose of financial gain. Reproduction or use outside this
permission or without authorization may be treated as copy‐
right infringement in accordance with the Copyright Act. Au‐
thorization may be obtained on written application to the Of‐
fice of the Speaker of the House of Commons.
Il est permis de reproduire les délibérations de la Chambre
et de ses comités, en tout ou en partie, sur n’importe quel sup‐
port, pourvu que la reproduction soit exacte et qu’elle ne soit
pas présentée comme version officielle. Il n’est toutefois pas
permis de reproduire, de distribuer ou d’utiliser les délibéra‐
tions à des fins commerciales visant la réalisation d'un profit
financier. Toute reproduction ou utilisation non permise ou
non formellement autorisée peut être considérée comme une
violation du droit d’auteur aux termes de la Loi sur le droit
d’auteur. Une autorisation formelle peut être obtenue sur
présentation d’une demande écrite au Bureau du Président
de la Chambre des communes.
Reproduction in accordance with this permission does not
constitute publication under the authority of the House of
Commons. The absolute privilege that applies to the proceed‐
ings of the House of Commons does not extend to these per‐
mitted reproductions. Where a reproduction includes briefs
to a committee of the House of Commons, authorization for
reproduction may be required from the authors in accor‐
dance with the Copyright Act.
La reproduction conforme à la présente permission ne con‐
stitue pas une publication sous l’autorité de la Chambre. Le
privilège absolu qui s’applique aux délibérations de la Cham‐
bre ne s’étend pas aux reproductions permises. Lorsqu’une
reproduction comprend des mémoires présentés à un comité
de la Chambre, il peut être nécessaire d’obtenir de leurs au‐
teurs l’autorisation de les reproduire, conformément à la Loi
sur le droit d’auteur.
Nothing in this permission abrogates or derogates from the
privileges, powers, immunities and rights of the House of
Commons and its committees. For greater certainty, this per‐
mission does not affect the prohibition against impeaching or
questioning the proceedings of the House of Commons in
courts or otherwise. The House of Commons retains the right
and privilege to find users in contempt of Parliament if a re‐
production or use is not in accordance with this permission.
La présente permission ne porte pas atteinte aux privilèges,
pouvoirs, immunités et droits de la Chambre et de ses
comités. Il est entendu que cette permission ne touche pas
l’interdiction de contester ou de mettre en cause les délibéra‐
tions de la Chambre devant les tribunaux ou autrement. La
Chambre conserve le droit et le privilège de déclarer l’utilisa‐
teur coupable d’outrage au Parlement lorsque la reproduc‐
tion ou l’utilisation n’est pas conforme à la présente permis‐
sion.
Also available on the House of Commons website at the
following address: https://www.ourcommons.ca
Aussi disponible sur le site Web de la Chambre des
communes à l’adresse suivante :
https://www.noscommunes.ca