https://www.ourcommons.ca/Content/House/431/Debates/002/HAN002-E.PDF
43rd PARLIAMENT, 1st SESSION
House of Commons Debates
Official Report
(Hansard)
VOLUME 149 NUMBER 002
Friday, December 6, 2019
Speaker: The Honourable Anthony Rota
CONTENTS
(Table of Contents appears at back of this issue.)
25
HOUSE OF COMMONS
Friday, December 6, 2019
The House met at 9:30 a.m.
Prayer
● (0935)
[Translation]
ÉCOLE POLYTECHNIQUE IN MONTREAL
The Speaker: Pursuant to an order made on Thursday, Decem‐
ber 5, the House will now proceed to statements on the 30th an‐
niversary of the tragedy at École Polytechnique in Montreal.
I now recognize the right hon. Prime Minister.
Right Hon. Justin Trudeau (Prime Minister, Lib.): Mr. Speak‐
er, 30 years ago today, 14 women were murdered in an anti-femi‐
nist attack at École Polytechnique in Montreal. It has been 30 years
since Geneviève Bergeron, Hélène Colgan, Nathalie Croteau and
Barbara Daigneault were killed in cold blood, 30 years since the
lives of Anne-Marie Edward, Maud Haviernick, Maryse Laganière,
Maryse Leclair and Anne-Marie Lemay were tragically cut short,
30 years since we lost Sonia Pelletier, Michèle Richard, Annie StArneault, Annie Turcotte and Barbara Klucznik-Widajewicz.
We gather today to mourn the loss of these women, these daugh‐
ters, sisters, friends and colleagues.
[English]
Each December, as we honour the memories of those 14 women,
the survivors and the families, we promise to do better, but the real‐
ity is that in 30 years things have not changed enough. Women,
girls and people of diverse gender identities still face unacceptable
and preventable violence, violence that destroys lives, families and
communities. It is more than time for change.
It is more than time to put an end to gender-based violence, in‐
cluding the national tragedy of missing and murdered indigenous
women and girls, because it is more than time to build a country
where everyone is safe and where everyone's rights are respected
and realized.
To find the way forward, we need only look around. From coast
to coast to coast, people are coming together and saying enough is
enough. Students and parents, women and men are saying no to
misogyny, to sexism, to hatred and to discrimination.
To the survivors, advocates and everyday Canadians who have
taken up this work, their courage is powerful and we will always
stand with them.
[Translation]
Actions speak louder than words. That is why we will be build‐
ing on the progress made under Canada's strategy to prevent and
address gender-based violence in order to develop a national action
plan. That is also why we are investing in women-led organizations
in Canada and around the world. However, we cannot stop there.
We need to do more, because even to this day, people in our com‐
munities are still losing loved ones to gun violence.
[English]
This fall, I announced that we will strengthen gun laws and ban
the types of weapons used at École polytechnique. These weapons,
designed to kill the largest number of people in the shortest amount
of time, have no place in our communities, in our streets, in our
country. Too many lives have already been lost, and thoughts and
prayers will not stop another tragedy. It is time to take real steps to
end gun violence in Canada.
● (0940)
[Translation]
On December 6, 1989, I was in CEGEP, just a few blocks away
from the École Polytechnique. I will never forget that deadly night.
As we come together today to remember the tragic events of
30 years ago, we must take action, on behalf of our sisters, our
daughters and all Canadians, to ensure that it never happens again.
Hon. Andrew Scheer (Leader of the Opposition, CPC): Mr.
Speaker, there were 14 of them. They were young, smart, and filled
with ambition. They were looking forward to the bright future that
lay ahead for them. No one knows when their time is up, and those
young women never could have guessed that one evil man was
about to rob them of what was most precious—their lives.
26 COMMONS DEBATES December 6, 2019
Tribute
Exactly 30 years ago today, these young women were heading to
university. For many of them, it was the last day of class, which is
normally a happy day. What were they thinking about when they
got up that morning? They might have been thinking about the up‐
coming holidays, or reuniting with their families and loved ones.
Maybe they had a Christmas carol in their head. They were likely a
little nervous about their upcoming exams. They might have been
thinking of future projects they wanted to take on.
All of those hopes and dreams were brutally destroyed that after‐
noon when a man committed a terrible and violent crime. On De‐
cember 6, 1989, at the École Polytechnique, he separated men and
women and started shooting the women, murdering 14 women and
wounding many others.
Geneviève Bergeron, Hélène Colgan, Nathalie Croteau, Bar‐
bara Daigneault, Anne-Marie Edward, Maud Haviernick, Bar‐
bara Klucznik-Widajewicz, Maryse Laganière, Maryse Leclair,
Anne-Marie Lemay, Sonia Pelletier, Michèle Richard, Annie StArneault and Annie Turcotte lost their lives. These names of these
14 women deserve to be read and honoured.
The victims of the École Polytechnique were wounded or killed
by a man who targeted them because they were women. Thirty
years later, we pause on this day, December 6, to mark the National
Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women.
As a father of three wonderful girls, as a brother to two brilliant
sisters and as a husband to an extraordinary woman, it pains me to
think that these women who I love so much, and all women today,
still have to be concerned for their safety just because they are
women.
It is completely unacceptable that violence against women is still
happening. That is why I am proposing that all Canadians, myself
included, do more than just be respectful toward women. Let us al‐
so be proactive and demonstrate through our actions how much we
value the safety and dignity of every life, of every single woman.
Thirty years later, let us honour the memory of these innocent
victims.
● (0945)
[English]
Let us consider the messages we send about the value, worth and
dignity of women in our speeches, our actions and the examples we
set for our sons and daughters. Let us each decide to do our part to
make Canada a safer place. In this way, 30 years later, let us honour
the memory of the victims of École Polytechnique.
[Translation]
Ms. Andréanne Larouche (Shefford, BQ): Mr. Speaker, there
is a plaque on the wall of the École Polytechnique, and there are 14
names engraved on that plaque: Geneviève Bergeron, Hélène Col‐
gan, Nathalie Croteau, Barbara Daigneault, Anne-Marie Edward,
Maud Haviernick, Barbara Klucznik-Widajewicz, Maryse La‐
ganière, Maryse Leclair, Anne-Marie Lemay, Sonia Pelletier,
Michèle Richard, Annie St-Arneault, Annie Turcotte. They were
the 14 women whose lives were taken, who were murdered because
they were women. These 14 women were daughters, partners, sis‐
ters, friends. They were taken from the people they loved, from the
people who loved them.
Although 14 women were killed in the anti-feminist attack at the
École Polytechnique, the victims number in the thousands, in the
millions even. Thirty years later, all Quebeckers still bear this bur‐
den, this awful sense of being tainted. This happened in Quebec at
the hands of a Quebecker. We all lost something on December 6,
1989. A man walked into a classroom in a place of knowledge and
learning, he separated the men and the women, he let the men
leave, and then he lined up the nine women and opened fire.
One of the students, Nathalie Provost, looked him in the eye and
tried to calm him down. She said, “Listen, we are just women
studying engineering. We are not feminists about to take to the
streets in a tirade against men. We are just students trying to live
normal lives.” Six of the women were killed, and three were in‐
jured. They were just students trying to live normal lives. After
that, he left the classroom and went on a terrifying a 20-minute
rampage through the school.
We all want our children to go to school. We tell them to go to
school, to learn, to find a career that suits them, to contribute to so‐
ciety and to do their best. On December 6, 1989, however, a school,
a university, was the site of a cowardly act of violence, hate and
misogyny.
It is not enough to commemorate the events at Polytechnique. It
is not enough to remember where we were and who we were with.
That is not enough. Thirty years after this event, we must continue
to fight to ensure that an anti-feminist attack like the one on De‐
cember 6, 1989, never happens again.
The following 14 names will be forever etched in our history
books: Geneviève Bergeron, Hélène Colgan, Nathalie Croteau, Bar‐
bara Daigneault, Anne-Marie Edward, Maud Haviernick, Barbara
Klucznik-Widajewicz, Maryse Laganière, Maryse Leclair, AnneMarie Lemay, Sonia Pelletier, Michèle Richard, Annie St-Arneault,
Annie Turcotte.
● (0950)
We must take action in your name. You forever symbolize the
fight to end violence against women, you are part of our con‐
science, and you are what inspires us to do better and be a better
society.
Thirty years later, thirty years after this day of infamy, let us
make a solemn commitment to fight misogyny, hate and violence
against women.
Words are not enough. In the House, we have the ability to take
concrete action to ensure that an anti-feminist attack such as the
one that occurred at the École Polytechnique in Montreal never
happens again.
We can introduce stronger gun controls, especially for assault
weapons and handguns, tighten border controls for firearms and en‐
sure that buyers of firearms are not a threat to anyone's life.
We must also address daily violence against women, the blows,
the horrible violence committed against women simply because
they are women.
December 6, 2019 COMMONS DEBATES 27
Tribute
We need to get going. We need to take action. We have a duty to
be vigilant. We owe it to the women we lost on December 6, 1989,
and to the women we have lost since then. Let us act to ensure that
this never happens again.
Mr. Jagmeet Singh (Burnaby South, NDP): Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to speak on behalf of all New Democrats in remembrance of
that terrible day, December 6, 1989, when 14 women were killed by
a man who hated them because of their gender.
● (0955)
[English]
Even after 30 years, it is still horrific to think of these deaths,
how young the women were and how much promise their lives
held. What continues to hit me today is how ordinary violence is,
and the message that it sends to women. We need to stop putting
the responsibility of being safe on women and girls and start
putting the responsibility of respecting women on men.
[Translation]
The hatred of women that fuelled the shooter that day 30 years
ago has not gone away. It still exists and every two and half days a
woman or girl is killed in our country, often by someone she knew.
[English]
It is here when women walk home at night with their keys in
their hands and a friend on speed-dial to make sure they make it
home safe. It was in Toronto last year, when a bitter young man
with a violent hatred for women ran down 10 people with a van,
and it is here every single day when indigenous women and girls
are dehumanized, stolen from their communities and murdered.
[Translation]
Thirty years after Canadians said “never again” in the wake of
the École Polytechnique tragedy, we must all acknowledge that we
have a long way to go to keep that promise.
Systemic change begins when governments take male violence
against women seriously, recognize that it is an epidemic, and bring
in a national action plan to end gender-based violence.
[English]
It means calling out damaging language that blames women, de‐
humanizes survivors and excuses men's brutality wherever it ap‐
pears in our media or our justice system. It means listening to wom‐
en and believing them when they share their experiences. It means
men working every day to become better feminist allies and hold‐
ing other men to account for sexism and misogyny. It means mak‐
ing sure that when a woman, girl or trans person needs access to
counselling or a shelter it is there for them with no wait, no matter
where they live.
It means that groups providing these services on the ground have
stable funding so that they can focus on helping women to escape
violence and rebuild their lives, instead of on scraping by until the
end of each funding cycle. It also means all of us in the House nam‐
ing this epidemic for what it is: men's violence against women.
[Translation]
Today, 30 years after that terrible December 6, we remember the
14 women who were killed because a man hated feminists and we
mourn them. I hope that 30 years from now, we look back on this
time as one when we as a country said “enough is enough”.
[English]
There is no such thing as an isolated incident of violence against
women. There are only choices that we make as Canadians. Today
we say that one death is one too many, and that toxic masculinity
hurts us all.
[Translation]
Every woman and girl has the right to humane treatment, safety,
happiness and freedom and they have the right to have ambition.
We support that choice through the actions taken in memory of the
thousands of women and girls killed by violent men. On this day,
we owe them nothing less.
● (1000)
[English]
Mrs. Jenica Atwin (Fredericton, GP): Mr. Speaker, I would
like to acknowledge the unceded, unsurrendered homeland of the
Anishinabe Algonquin nation on which we stand.
[Translation]
Today is the National Day of Remembrance and Action on Vio‐
lence against Women. We remember the victims of the December 6,
1989, attack at École Polytechnique. This attack was a vile, antifeminist act, and it was not an isolated one. This attack was a direct
consequence of the rampant misogyny in our society. Violence
against women has not been eradicated in our communities.
[English]
Misogyny continues to exist today and has seen a resurgence as
of late. As with racism or homophobia, we must name it so we can
end it. There can be no place for gender-based hatred in our society.
This day commemorates a living history of ongoing violence
against women and girls and members of the LGBTQIA2+ commu‐
nity, particularly those who also face other forms of discrimination
for their race, religion or economic status. Whether it is in the
echoes of a fight from the apartment upstairs, in hateful comments
on Facebook or Twitter or in the backlog of case files of missing
and murdered indigenous women and girls, we must not forget that
there is still so much violence and marginalization facing women
across the country.
28 COMMONS DEBATES December 6, 2019
The Address
We must work to educate society about consent and our responsi‐
bility to call out violence where we see it, to intervene and to help
prevent instances of abuse. We must also support women who are
seeking to end the violence they face. We must believe them.
[Translation]
Yesterday, CBC/Radio-Canada reported that New Brunswick had
the highest number of domestic murder-suicides of all Canadian
provinces. Seventy per cent of these homicides are committed in
rural communities. These tragic deaths prove that there is a glaring
lack of essential services to support women who are facing all
kinds of violence.
[English]
By the same token, we need to support women who continue to
push boundaries and break through the glass ceilings in their own
worlds, despite the challenges and sometimes the dangers that this
brings.
Today I remember the 14 women cut down in the massacre at
École Polytechnique, and today I commit to women across Canada,
and indeed across the world, that I believe them and support them.
There is no room for misogyny in Canada.
I remember.
[Translation]
I remember.
[Member spoke in Wolastoqiyik and provided the following text:]
Nwewitahatom.
[Member provided the following translation:]
I remember.
[Translation]
The Speaker: I invite all members to stand and observe a mo‐
ment of silence in memory of the victims of the tragedy that oc‐
curred 30 years ago at École Polytechnique in Montreal.
[A moment of silence observed]
SPEECH FROM THE THRONE
[English]
RESUMPTION OF DEBATE ON ADDRESS IN REPLY
The House resumed from December 5 consideration of the mo‐
tion for an address to Her Excellency the Governor General in reply
to her speech at the opening of the session.
Hon. Andrew Scheer (Leader of the Opposition, CPC): Mr.
Speaker, I appreciate the applause from the other side, but members
have not heard what I am about to say yet, so they might want to
retract it in a few moments. I appreciate it and thank them.
As we take our seats and take up the people's business in this
chamber, we all share in a privilege of protecting the hopes and
dreams of our neighbours, communities and fellow Canadians
through the work we do.
As I return here for the sixth time, I am so grateful to once again
have earned the confidence of my constituents in Regina—Qu'Ap‐
pelle, because this seat does not belong to me; it belongs to them.
None of the seats in this chamber belong to any of us, including the
Prime Minister's seat. Instead, these seats all belong to the people
who sent us here, and they sent us here to get to work. Canadians
sent us here to make sure the country works for them, their jobs,
their livelihoods, their cost of living, their health care, their envi‐
ronment, the safety of their communities and the security of our
country on the world stage.
● (1005)
[Translation]
It is clear that we have a lot of work to do. No matter what party
or region we are from, we all have a duty to listen, to learn, to grow
and to improve. All of us, on both sides of the House, need to ex‐
pect more from ourselves and from others.
[English]
This is particularly true in light of the results of the last election,
in which the people sent a clear message to all of us that the status
quo had failed, that the approach of the previous four years was just
not good enough.
Canadians want better, and as the strongest opposition in Canadi‐
an history, we are going to make sure they get better. We will spend
this Parliament proposing constructive solutions to Canada's most
pressing problems. We are prepared to work with Canadians of ev‐
ery political stripe, focused on implementing ideas that actually
work.
This does not mean we will compromise on the principles that
make us Conservatives, and it certainly does not mean that we will
shirk from our responsibilities as Her Majesty's loyal opposition to
hold the government accountable every day in every way for its
ethical lapses, errors and misdeeds. Canada's Conservatives are al‐
ways prepared to look for common ground, but make no mistake,
we will do our job.
It is just as important to recognize that when Canadians voted in
the fall election, when they passed judgment on the previous four
years, they were rendering a verdict on a four-year stretch in which
the Liberal Party wielded virtually unchecked power. While the
talking heads and pundits have been working overtime to spin the
election results as anything else, the facts of this election are clear:
The Liberal Party lost votes and seats in every region of the coun‐
try. It lost the popular vote and was reduced to a minority govern‐
ment with the weakest mandate in Canadian history.
[Translation]
Canadians sent the Prime Minister a message that requires some
reflection, as he himself admits.
December 6, 2019 COMMONS DEBATES 29
The Address
● (1010)
[English]
Just because the Prime Minister avoided being fired does not
mean he gets to act like he had a promotion. To be fair, he gave the
appearance that he might be changing. He met with me and opposi‐
tion leaders early on to discuss shared goals. He made a grand show
of meeting premiers and mayors from across the country. However,
yesterday in the Speech from the Throne, he revealed that he has
not learned a thing, that he has not changed at all, even though the
people of Canada sent a message that they demand better: better
than four years of unserious, entitled government; better than four
years of government that puts the interests of activists and lobbyists
ahead of the jobs for Canadian families; better than four years of
the Prime Minister's lecturing others about standards that he him‐
self refused to live up to.
Canadians demand better. They demand a fundamentally new ap‐
proach by a government that is prepared to rise to this moment in
history. Times of fear bring times of division, and Canadians are
afraid for their country. We must return to what makes us strong as
a nation. We must put a stop to the divisive policies that have pitted
province against province and region against region.
Canada was built on the idea that we are stronger when we work
together, when we dream together, when big nation-building
projects are seen not just as possible but necessary. I believe we can
build that kind of Canada again. That is what we came to the House
prepared to work for.
Yesterday we were sorely disappointed. This throne speech was
supposed to be the first real part of the Prime Minister's new ap‐
proach. That is what these speeches are all about. It is a statement
of intent about how the government has changed, how it will learn
and how it will improve. As I listened to the Governor General, that
is what I was waiting to hear, some humility. I am still waiting.
If this Liberal government ends just like the last one, then an op‐
portunity to learn and grow will have been missed and the message
Canadians sent to the Liberal Party on October 21 will have truly
been ignored.
One of the most important roles of the official opposition is to al‐
ways be ready as a government in waiting to provide an alternative
to the status quo. This is doubly true in a minority Parliament.
[Translation]
Today I want to talk about the challenges our country is facing,
as well as the opportunities ahead and the leadership it will need.
[English]
I will talk about the kinds of actions all Canadians should expect
from all parties in this Parliament: first, support for Canadian fami‐
lies that are struggling with the rising cost of living; second, keep‐
ing Canadians safe in an increasingly unstable world; third, creating
and sustaining good Canadian jobs in a time of economic uncertain‐
ty; fourth, protecting the environment and fighting climate change
at home and around the world; and fifth, preserving national unity
and healing the divisions between provinces, between regions and
between all Canadians.
Let us begin by talking about what should be the top priority for
us all: supporting Canadian families who are struggling with the
rising cost of living. Too many of the political games being played
by the political classes are far removed from the real hardships fac‐
ing real people.
[Translation]
Over half of Canadians have $200 or less in the bank at the end
of the month. They are a breath away from financial hardship. They
are vulnerable to interest rate hikes, living as they do on the brink
of insolvency.
[English]
September 2019 had the highest number of personal bankruptcies
since the Great Recession and the middle class is struggling. Over
the past three years, the number of food bank users with jobs has
gone up 27%. More and more hard-working people are not getting
by. People are struggling to pay the mortgage, the rent or their bills.
[Translation]
More and more Canadian families are struggling to put food on
the table or gas up the car.
[English]
The tax burden is going up. Studies have shown that for an aver‐
age Canadian family earning $117,000 of combined income, 44.7%
of that income, or $52,000, goes to paying taxes, and 53% of that
goes to paying federal taxes. Nevertheless, over the past several
weeks there has been a chorus of voices from elite corners of Cana‐
dian high society demanding that our party endorse the carbon tax.
Let me be clear: We will always oppose a carbon tax because we
know the real cost it imposes on the Canadian people.
The entire point of the carbon tax is to make essentials more ex‐
pensive, making it harder to put fuel in the tank. It is about punish‐
ing a mom for driving her kids to school, punishing a dad for driv‐
ing his daughter to soccer practice, punishing a senior for turning
up the heat on a cold winter's day. We are not going to support that,
especially when the Liberal carbon tax has granted a massive ex‐
emption to the country's largest emitters. There are better ways to
fight climate change.
[Translation]
It is time to take action to lower the cost of living and put more
money in the pockets of hard-working Canadians.
[English]
Another issue Canadians are looking to the government for lead‐
ership on is how we are going to keep them safe in an increasingly
unstable world.
30 COMMONS DEBATES December 6, 2019
The Address
Let us not sugar-coat it. The world has become a much more
dangerous place. The Government of China continues with an ex‐
pansionist agenda that is threatening Hong Kong's vibrant democra‐
cy and the safety and security of the people of Hong Kong them‐
selves.
Just as important to Canadians, the same Chinese dictatorship
continues to hold two innocent Canadians hostage in retaliation to
Canada's fulfilling its legal obligation to arrest and extradite
Huawei executive Meng Wanzhou. I understand that this is a matter
of very serious diplomatic sensitivity for the government, and I
have no doubt that behind the scenes there is a lot of work being
done to secure the safe return of the two Canadians the Chinese
government is holding. However, what is incomprehensible to
Canadians is that in the face of this blatant attack, the Minister of
Small Business still travelled to China and posed in photo ops to
promote China as a place for Canadian investment.
Canadians are asking why the government is still giving $256
million to the Asian Infrastructure Bank so that China can develop
infrastructure in other parts of the world. In fact, we found out just
recently that this Asian Infrastructure Bank, funded by Canadian
tax dollars at a time when western Canadian energy companies are
struggling to get their product to market, funded not one but two
pipeline projects in other countries. Canadians want to know why
the Prime Minister is so silent in the face of such a blatant outrage.
He should at least respond to what his own Minister of Foreign Af‐
fairs said: “China stand[s] out as [a] beacon of stability, predictabil‐
ity, a rule-based system, a very inclusive society.”
While he is at it, the Prime Minister could also share how his
government intends to check the Russian expansionism that threat‐
ens countries like Ukraine and the Baltic states while funding cy‐
ber-sabotage around the world that threatens our alliances and
democratic institutions.
While he is at it, he could explain the calculation his government
made in abandoning the State of Israel and Jews around the world
when his government curried favour with anti-Semitic factions at
the United Nations to earn itself a Security Council seat.
However, most of all we would really appreciate hearing the
Prime Minister talk about Canada's deteriorating relationship with
the United States, one that was only exacerbated by his own con‐
duct at this week's NATO summit. We understand that President
Trump is a challenging negotiator, but Americans are our partners
all the same, and no international file is more important to Canadi‐
an jobs and livelihoods than the ratification of the new NAFTA.
● (1015)
[Translation]
The fact is that 80% of our GDP depends on trade. We need an
effective foreign policy to ensure that our allies and trade partners
continue to trust us and trade with us.
[English]
Whether we are talking about steel industries in Ontario, alu‐
minum industries in Quebec, our forestry industry in B.C., our agri‐
culture and agri-food industries, including our supply-managed sec‐
tors, the auto sector, the aerospace sector or the hundreds of thou‐
sands of workers who depend on our energy sector, Canada's econ‐
omy, Canadian workers and Canadian jobs depend on having a
government that will stand up for our country no matter what.
This brings me to what should be another very important govern‐
ment priority: creating and sustaining Canadian jobs in a time of
economic uncertainty.
Let us have some true moral clarity in the House right now. As I
speak, a network of foreign-funded activist groups is trying to per‐
manently shut down Canada's energy sector and drive hundreds of
thousands of Canadians out of work. They have already done last‐
ing damage to the economies in western Canada and to the liveli‐
hoods of thousands of families who depend on the development of
our oil and gas to pay the bills. Every single member of the House
should be expected to stand up and be counted. Do they stand with
the activists or do they stand with the workers of Canada?
These groups take foreign funding and interfere in our discussion
around energy and pipelines in this country. It has never made any
sense to me why there are loud voices in this country, including
many from the government benches, that want to ban and block the
exportation of Canadian energy to foreign markets. Meanwhile,
they do nothing when tanker after tanker of foreign oil comes into
Canadian markets.
When Canadians make these decisions for themselves, they
should be doing it by themselves. That is why a core Conservative
commitment is to ban foreign-funded activist groups from partici‐
pating in the approval process for large energy projects.
I can stand here confidently on behalf of every single member of
the Conservative caucus and say with certainty that every single
one of us will stand with Canadian workers every single time.
Therefore, we are going to fight for pipelines, for lower taxes and
for reduced regulations to make Canada the best place in the world
to invest, start a business and create jobs. This will include repeal‐
ing Bill C-69 and the tanker ban that has signalled that Canada is
closed for business.
● (1020)
[Translation]
We will seek to diversify our trade relationships to reduce our de‐
pendence on the United States. When we, the Conservatives, were
in office, we negotiated free trade and investment agreements with
53 countries, while protecting our business interests. We will put
the same amount of energy into breaking down trade barriers in
Canada as we will into standing up for free trade beyond our bor‐
ders.
December 6, 2019 COMMONS DEBATES 31
The Address
[English]
I hear it from our provincial counterparts and I hear it from busi‐
nesses: It is time to build a true single market inside of Canada that
can compete with trading blocs around the world and other single
markets. We can do all of this while living up to our responsibility
to future generations when it comes to environmental challenges
like climate change.
Fighting climate change will require honesty and it will require
co-operation, but first is honesty: Canada produces less than 2% of
global emissions. China alone produces over 27% and saw a 4% in‐
crease in CO2 emissions just in the first half of 2019.
That is why our Conservative plan focuses on exporting Canadi‐
an green technologies and on substituting coal in China with clean
Canadian natural gas and carbon capture technology. It is because
we know that Canada can make a real difference by taking the cli‐
mate change fight globally. Imposing a carbon tax on seniors will
not do that. Even if it were possible to drop Canada's emissions to
zero, it would not make a dent in our shared global obligation.
As well, if the Liberals do take climate change seriously, why
would they rely so much on imposing taxes on essential things that
are known to be unresponsive to price increases? It is time to stop
targeting Canadian commuters and seniors and instead focus on in‐
novative market-based policies that prepare Canada for the future
and can ensure we make a real impact on global emissions. A real
plan must offer a global vision for fighting climate change.
[Translation]
We can fight climate change without imposing taxes on parents
who are taking their children to school. We need to invest in new
technologies and establish a higher standard for big polluters so that
they reduce their emissions at the source.
[English]
Finally, I want to talk about the gravest danger facing our na‐
tion's prosperity and the steps we can and must take to preserve na‐
tional unity during this time of peril.
We are facing a time when our country is being divided between
east and west, between English and French and between urban and
rural. Even the divisions between generations continue to grow. No
Canadian can afford to be oblivious to this threat, least of all mem‐
bers of this House. As a proud MP from Saskatchewan, I would
caution all of our colleagues from across Canada to not underesti‐
mate the deep alienation and anger that people of my province,
along with our neighbours in Alberta, currently feel about their deal
in the confederation.
The damage done over the past four years is significant. Today,
175,000 Alberta energy workers are unemployed. Proud Canadian
companies like TransCanada and Encana are moving their busi‐
nesses to the U.S.
[Translation]
After only four years of Liberal rule, the Bloc Québécois,
32 sovereignist members strong, has returned with a vengeance.
Premier Legault had specific requests. The Liberal government did
not consider any of them, yet the Bloc members have decided to
support the throne speech anyway. During the election campaign,
the Bloc claimed to be the voice of Premier Legault, and this is the
result. Only the Conservative members will stand up for Quebec's
interests, not the Bloc.
[English]
The rifts dividing our country are deep, but they can heal. The
first rule of medicine is to do no harm. That is why we must rele‐
gate the rigid ideological approach of the first Liberal term from the
front pages to the history pages. We must focus on the things that
unite Canadians.
I still believe that Canada can be a place of big dreams and that
the same spirit that built the Canadian Pacific Railway, the Tran‐
sCanada Highway and the St. Lawrence Seaway still exists today.
We can still achieve big things together. This country can work for
both the west and the east and for all provinces in between, but only
a Conservative government has the vision to do just that.
I do believe that national unity is not something that we do; it is
something that happens when we get the big things and the little
things right. Our role as an official opposition is to fight for Cana‐
dians who, inadvertently or not, are hurt or left behind by the gov‐
ernment's agenda, so we will show up every day. We will be ready
to do our job.
● (1025)
[Translation]
We will use every tool at our disposal to oppose the items on the
government's agenda that could harm Canadians.
[English]
We will constantly be at the ready, with better policies and a bet‐
ter plan to replace the government when it falls.
Canadians can no longer afford a government that gets the big
questions wrong. We know we have a better program that will help
unite Canada, create jobs, help Canadians make ends meet, and al‐
low more Canadians from all races, regions, genders, religions, sex‐
ual orientations and languages to pursue their dreams and build a
better life right here in Canada, right here at home.
On behalf of Canada's official opposition, I therefore move:
That the motion be amended by adding the following:
“and wishes to inform Your Excellency that Canada is threatened by:
Declining productivity and competitiveness, a rising cost of living and chal‐
lenges to our society which requires:
Offering a plan for tax relief for Canadians with a path to a balanced budget,
Restoring Canada as an attractive place to invest,
Addressing social challenges that limit the ability of Canadians to achieve their
full potential, and
32 COMMONS DEBATES December 6, 2019
The Address
Developing a real environment plan that strengthens the competitiveness of our
economic sectors and tackles global climate change;
A weakening position within an increasingly uncertain world, which requires:
Confronting threats such as the regimes in Moscow and Beijing and protecting
Canadian sovereignty in the Arctic,
Developing a principled foreign policy that stands with traditional allies such as
NATO, Ukraine, and Israel, and
Facing the rise of protectionism and strengthening the relationship with our
largest trading partners;
A national unity crisis, which requires:
Respecting provincial jurisdiction and scrapping the carbon tax,
Stopping the attack on the Western Canadian economy, and
Restoring confidence in our national institutions, starting by returning ethics and
accountability to the federal government.
The Speaker: The amendment is in order.
Questions and comments.
● (1030)
Mr. Kevin Lamoureux (Winnipeg North, Lib.): Mr. Speaker,
over the years it has been very well established that this govern‐
ment and this Prime Minister have been focused on Canada's mid‐
dle class. We have seen many progressive policies brought to the
floor of the House that have enabled hundreds of thousands of chil‐
dren to be lifted out of poverty. Seniors have been lifted out of
poverty. We have seen record amounts of infrastructure dollars in‐
vested in every region of our nation. We are—
Some hon. members: Oh, oh!
The Speaker: Could I have members' attention, please?
I want members to remember one thing I said yesterday: that our
moms, dads, daughters and entire families are watching. I want
them to be proud of us here and I do not think shouting is the way
to do that.
The hon. member for Winnipeg North.
Mr. Kevin Lamoureux: Mr. Speaker, we are committed to pro‐
viding ongoing support of Canada's middle class and those needing
assistance to be lifted out of poverty. The throne speech embodies
many progressive measures, such as a continued commitment to tax
breaks for Canada's middle class. I am sure the leader of the official
opposition will recall that the Conservative Party voted against
many of those progressive measures, including the tax break.
When the leader of the official opposition says he will support
Canadians from coast to coast, will he put actions to his words and
support the government's initiative, which will continue to lift
Canadians out of poverty and provide tax breaks for Canada's mid‐
dle class?
Hon. Andrew Scheer: Mr. Speaker, Conservatives always sup‐
port tax reductions. What we were voting against were the tax hikes
the Liberal government included in its budget, the cancelling of the
children's fitness tax credit and the public transit tax credit, and the
tens of billions of dollars of new debt that the Liberal government
has piled onto the backs of future generations of Canadians taxpay‐
ers.
The member wants to talk about infrastructure dollars. The Par‐
liamentary Budget Officer said that the Liberal plan “did not exist”.
He wants to talk about jobs. November saw the biggest job decline
in Canada in recent years. He wants to talk about the middle class.
They are paying more taxes under the Liberal government. Almost
45% of their income is going just to pay the taxes.
If the member wants to see concrete proposals, he will find them
in our plan to make life more affordable for Canadians by lowering
taxes on all Canadians, by bringing back those popular tax credits
that made life more affordable and by having a responsible plan to
get back to balanced budgets so that less money from Canadian tax‐
payers is going just to pay the interest on the debt. I would invite
him to vote for that plan.
Mr. Charlie Angus (Timmins—James Bay, NDP): Mr. Speak‐
er, I welcome the Leader of the Opposition back as Leader of the
Opposition.
I listened with great interest to his speech and I heard the discon‐
nect that we heard throughout the election. Sure, we heard about
Liberal corruption, but we heard a lot about melting ground. Cer‐
tainly the ground is melting beneath his feet for failing to put for‐
ward any coherent climate change plan.
I represent blue-collar industrial workers, and they are concerned
about the issue of catastrophic climate change. Year in and year out,
emissions rise. We are expecting a 60% rise in emissions from the
oil fields in the next 20 years, and what do we get from the mem‐
ber? We get the conspiracy theory of foreign radicals trying to un‐
dermine our industry. Nobody buys that.
We do not have any coherent plan other than the carbon tax, but
what I find deeply offensive is the fact that the Leader of the Oppo‐
sition is telling the House that if Jason Kenney does not get his way
and massively expand the oil fields, the Conservatives will put the
issue of the future of our country on the table.
It is unacceptable that a Conservative member stands, without
any coherent credibility on the single biggest crisis facing our plan‐
et, and tells the rest of Canada that they have to go along with his
conspiracy theories, with no credibility on environmental change,
or Conservatives will break up our country.
I would tell that member to drop that kind of language, because
the ground is certainly melting beneath his feet very quickly at this
point.
● (1035)
Hon. Andrew Scheer: Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate
the member on his re-election. I know he has a new seat in the
House of Commons. He is being returned to that party as a member
of the fourth party. I hope he enjoys the new perspective over there.
December 6, 2019 COMMONS DEBATES 33
The Address
I can understand why the member does not believe there are for‐
eign radical groups trying to destroy jobs in our economy. In the
NDP, the members are all domestic. This is the problem with that
party. It does not understand that our plan achieves the dual balance
of reducing CO2 emissions by taking the climate change fight glob‐
ally and by recognizing that Canadian industries have taken advan‐
tage of things like innovative tax credits for investments and tech‐
nology to reduce the amount of emissions they produce.
I would invite the member to come to Alberta and Saskatchewan
to see the types of advancements being made in extracting our natu‐
ral resources at a lower rate of emissions. That is the benefit of our
plan. That is why we need to replace the Liberal government and
implement these policies, so we can get the hundreds of thousands
of people who have lost their jobs back on their feet.
If the member thinks that it is just idle rhetoric when I talk about
the hurt and alienation in Saskatchewan and Alberta, that is despi‐
cable and shameful. I will take no lessons from him about standing
up for this country and standing up for—
Mr. Charlie Angus: Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of order. I
know it is your first day, and you will make an amazing Speaker,
but for the Leader of the Opposition to accuse someone who is rep‐
resenting their—
The Speaker: I am sorry. We cannot hear. It is not working. I
cannot hear to make out whether it is debate. Can I have order in
the House for a second so I can hear the hon. member for Tim‐
mins—James Bay?
The hon. member Timmins—James Bay.
Mr. Charlie Angus: Mr. Speaker, it is very unparliamentary for
the leader of a party to accuse someone of being despicable for ask‐
ing the question. That is the antithesis of democracy—
The Speaker: I am sorry. If I can interrupt again, we are having
a real technical problem here. I cannot hear what is happening.
The hon. member for Timmins—James Bay.
Mr. Charlie Angus: Mr. Speaker, if we are going to establish a
tone in the House, and while you have a lot of our respect, to call
someone “despicable” for asking a question that is relevant to the
issues of the day is very unparliamentary. If this is the tone that
member is going to raise, we are going to have a very difficult
number of years.
I am asking, Mr. Speaker, that you ask the member to withdraw
that personal attack.
The Speaker: I was listening to both back-and-forth and there
were words I could have picked out of both questions.
What I am asking is that all members keep track and watch what
they say to each other. Remember that we are not naming people
and we are not badgering people to bring them down. We are debat‐
ing ideas. Let us keep it at that level.
The hon. member for Nanaimo—Ladysmith.
● (1040)
Mr. Paul Manly (Nanaimo—Ladysmith, GP): Mr. Speaker, as
this is my first opportunity to speak in the House of Commons, I
would like to thank the good people of Nanaimo—Ladysmith for
electing me not once but twice in the last six months. However, I
am not excited about the idea of going back for another election. I
know some members are.
There are a lot of things to deal with in my community. I have
four first nations that are looking forward to the implementation of
the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. My com‐
munity has the highest homelessness per capita in Canada. We have
an affordability crisis. We have a mental health crisis. We have an
opioid crisis. Our regional hospital is old and it serves the oldest
population per capita in Canada. We have more people over the age
of 75 in the regional district of Nanaimo—Ladysmith than any‐
where else in Canada.
There are a lot of things that I want to work on across party lines
to get things done in this Parliament with the government. One of
those things is climate change.
I know that my hon. friend for Cowichan—Malahat—Langford
has carried fish in trucks to get them up the river because of the
droughts. Our forest industry is suffering because of climate
change. We see our forests dying. People want action. It is affecting
our economy.
If members would indulge me for a moment, my mother was
born in Alberta and my father was born in Saskatoon. I have a lot
of relatives in those communities. They are hard-working, salt-ofthe-earth, innovative, industrious people. They are get-her-done
folks.
Does the hon. member for Regina—Qu'Appelle see a future for
Alberta and Saskatchewan, besides ripping and shipping raw re‐
sources out of those provinces, by using the innovation and hard
work of the people of those provinces to change the future for our
children and grandchildren and so we can have a future?
Hon. Andrew Scheer: Mr. Speaker, the last part of the member's
question was a very unfortunate attack on two provinces and the
energy sector, which provides jobs for so many thousands of fami‐
lies. That is the type of rhetoric that we hear from groups and indi‐
viduals who are trying to shut down Canadian development while
other countries expand and develop overseas markets for their
products.
I agree with the member on much of what he said as it relates to
the lack of a mention in the throne speech on many important is‐
sues. However, we have an exciting plan to help those who are ad‐
dicted to opioids with a recovery plan that invests in people. Instead
of just maintaining addictions we actually will help people get off
harmful drugs. Those are the types of things we will be proposing
in this Parliament as well.
Right Hon. Justin Trudeau (Prime Minister, Lib.): Mr. Speak‐
er, it is a pleasure to rise in the House today to respond to the
speech from the Leader of the Opposition.
34 COMMONS DEBATES December 6, 2019
The Address
One of the things we have listened to and heard from Canadians
over the past number of months of the election campaign and sub‐
sequently is the need for us to collaborate in the House, a need for
us to work together. One element of that will involve actually lis‐
tening to each other in the House.
[Translation]
My team gave me an excellent speech to read in response to the
Leader of the Opposition's speech, but this morning, I am choosing
not to read it because it was written yesterday. I want to take the
time to really listen to the Leader of the Opposition, who shared his
thoughts on the work this Parliament will be doing and his vision
for the best way to help Canadians across the country.
This is indicative of the new approach we need to take. Instead
of merely reading a speech that itemizes everything we have done
and everything we want to do, a speech that brings together all the
elements in the excellent throne speech delivered yesterday, I
would rather respond to the Leader of the Opposition's speech by
addressing each of his points individually.
[English]
Unfortunately, as I go through the elements that the hon. Leader
of the Opposition laid out in his speech, I will have to stray a bit
from them. There are some really important issues that matter to
this country and to Canadians that he did not develop, dwell on or
share his perspective on. First and foremost is the issue of indige‐
nous reconciliation.
We are gathered here today, and every day, on the unceded terri‐
tory of the Algonquin Anishinabe people. As we move forward as a
country, we have to include every Canadian and ensure they have a
real and fair chance to succeed. For far too long in these houses of
Parliament, we have not properly walked the road of reconciliation,
which is a difficult road to be sure. It is one that will have setbacks
and challenges as we walk it, but one on which we can make real
progress, not just for indigenous Canadians but for all Canadians,
as all Canadians have asked us repeatedly in recent elections to do.
To continue to step up on indigenous reconciliation is something
that we on this side of the House will do. I am sure it was a simple
oversight on behalf of the Leader of the Opposition. I know that
many people on the other side very much want us to work in part‐
nership and in respect with indigenous peoples in the country.
He also did not touch on the health challenges and health oppor‐
tunities we have as a country, to move forward on the big things
that will make a real difference for Canadians, whether they be na‐
tional universal pharmacare, ensuring that every Canadian can ac‐
cess a family doctor or ensuring that there are clear outcomes and
expectations on mental health care right across the country. These
are the things, along with home and palliative care, on which we in‐
tend to work.
We understand they are elements we will need to work on with
the provinces, in respect and in partnership, because of provincial
jurisdiction. That is why I am pleased to have begun some of those
conversations already. I am very pleased to have an outstanding
health minister and team, along with our deputy prime minister,
who will engage directly with the premiers of provinces and territo‐
ries across the country to move forward on keeping Canadians
healthy.
● (1045)
[Translation]
Now the challenge for me is to respond to the Leader of the Op‐
position's speech, so I will go over his list of priorities for Canadi‐
ans.
I do not think any Canadian anywhere in this country will be sur‐
prised to hear me say that, aside from those omissions, we agree
with what he identified as Canadians' top concerns: the cost of liv‐
ing, affordability, the safety of Canadians abroad, ensuring the
availability of good jobs for Canadians, fighting climate change
and, lastly, national unity.
I think it is worth taking a look at each of those issues as well as
some of the points he made and how he thinks we can address those
issues. I want to show not only that we know how to listen, but also
that we want to work with all parties in the House of Commons.
[English]
I will first address the question of affordability.
The Leader of the Opposition recognized that many Canadians
are feeling anxious about their personal finances, about the path
forward for themselves to retirement and about the path forward for
their children to getting good jobs in the future. There are concerns
about the rising costs of living. Questions of day-to-day expenses,
the costs of housing and everyday purchases keep Canadians anx‐
ious. We agree entirely. That is why the Liberal Party set out four
years ago to focus on the middle class and the people working hard
to join it. What we proposed in this Speech from the Throne, and in
this mandate as we move forward, is to respond to that in concrete
and tangible ways.
A number of the initiatives we put forward in our first mandate
have started to have significant positive effects on Canadians, but
we know there is much more to do. The very first thing we did in
the last Parliament was put forward a tax cut for the middle class by
raising taxes on the wealthiest 1%. We knew that lowering taxes for
Canadians was something that would make a difference in their
lives and would demonstrate that we understand the anxiety people
are feeling. That is the very first thing we moved forward with. We
propose, in this 43rd Parliament, that the very first thing we do
once again is lower taxes for Canadians.
We are planning on putting forward very shortly a proposal to
raise the basic minimum exemption that people pay on their taxes
to $15,000. That means that thousands of Canadians will no longer
have to pay taxes at all, because they make less than $15,000.
Many more will see their tax burdens decrease significantly. If we
are looking for common ground in this House of Commons, as we
are, this proposal significantly resembles the proposal put forward
by the leader of the official opposition to help at the lowest levels
of our tax system.
December 6, 2019 COMMONS DEBATES 35
The Address
The Leader of the Opposition put forward a proposal that would
help Canadians. We only have one small issue with it, which our
proposal actually fixes, and I do not think it is a proposal that the
Leader of the Opposition or his team will be preoccupied with. I
think they can support it, because the change we made is to make
sure that as we lower taxes for low-income Canadians and the mid‐
dle class, we do not actually give any extra advantages to the
wealthiest Canadians. The small hiccup in the proposal that the
Leader of the Opposition put forward was that it would benefit
someone making $400,000 a year, rather than someone mak‐
ing $40,000 a year. We are ensuring that the help we are giving to
Canadians by lowering taxes really goes to those who need it most.
That will help with affordability.
● (1050)
[Translation]
The second big thing we did as a government four years ago was
introduce the Canada child benefit. We stopped sending cheques to
millionaire families like mine and that of my colleague, and we
started giving more money to those who need it most: low-income
and middle-class families. This measure has helped lift over
300,000 Canadian children out of poverty.
However, we recognize that more work needs to be done, and I
do not want to use my time talking about what we have done over
the past four years. I would rather talk about what we plan to do
moving forward. We want to increase the Canada child benefit for
families with children under the age of one. I think everyone here
can get behind such a measure. As we know, it costs more to care
for newborns than it does to raise children who are three or 13
years of age. This measure will truly help families, and we know it
will help boost people's confidence in their future and in their chil‐
dren's future. This will also help reduce the anxieties that we know
many Canadians experience.
We also acknowledge that housing is a concern for so many
Canadians. That is why we recently developed a national housing
strategy that will improve affordability and access to housing for
Canadians. However we, of course recognize that we still have a lot
of work to do.
[English]
We have worked with municipalities and provinces to respond to
the very real need for housing. We recognize there is more to do
and that is why we are continuing to invest in infrastructure. We
look forward to bringing in the Canada housing benefit, which will
be a portable benefit based on going to families rather than to a spe‐
cific apartment or location. This will give families a broader range
of choices in affording the housing they need in order to build a fu‐
ture for themselves and their families.
We also recognize that far too many young Canadians, far too
many first-time homebuyers are seeing greater barriers to buying
their first home as housing prices rise across the country. Even with
economic growth and more jobs, we know that people are facing
anxiety, and that any delays in millennials or others buying their
first home ends up accumulating in missed opportunities to build
the equity throughout their lives that would afford them a good re‐
tirement. That is why we put in place the first-time home buyer ini‐
tiative a number of years ago, which provides money to first-time
homebuyers that lowers their mortgage costs and makes buying
their first home more affordable. However, that is something we
have done already.
What we are proposing to do as a next step around housing af‐
fordability is to make sure that people in high-cost markets, like
Vancouver and the Lower Mainland, Victoria or the GTA, have a
larger benefit. That would allow more people to buy their first
home, even in places where the cost of housing is significantly
higher than other places. Our focus on affordability and supporting
the middle class, as well as the people working hard to join it, runs
through everything we do.
What was interesting about the Leader of the Opposition's com‐
ments on this is that he talked about the carbon tax as being a sig‐
nificant cost for Canadians. If he is serious about reducing people's
anxiety about the future and reassuring Canadians about their abili‐
ty to tackle new challenges and support their families, it would be
good if we were able to lay out the actual facts of what our plan of
putting a price on pollution means for Canadians across the coun‐
try.
First of all, to prevent pollution from being free anywhere in the
country, we wanted to work with the provinces to ensure that they
could create a price on pollution in a way that suited each province
and its realities. That was the starting point. We would rather not
have to bring in a federal backstop anywhere across the country, be‐
cause we know that provinces have varied needs and perspectives
and should be able to determine their own way of fighting climate
change and putting a price on pollution to make sure it is not free
anywhere in the country. However, we also need to make sure that
everyone across the country is doing their part to prevent pollution
from being free anywhere in the country, and that we have a level
playing field. That is why, rightly, in our pan-Canadian framework
to fight climate change, we expect a similar level of equivalency
and stringency right across the country.
There are a number of provinces that do not believe it is impor‐
tant to fight climate change or to put a price on pollution. There‐
fore, we have to move forward in bringing in a backstop.
36 COMMONS DEBATES December 6, 2019
Statements by Members
● (1055)
However, every single dollar collected from a particular province
for the price on pollution will be returned to that province. Most
important, average costs for an average family in that province will
be less on the price on pollution we added than the climate action
incentive we return to them at tax time before the full year is up.
Therefore, very simply and clearly put, in the provinces in which
there is a federal backstop, that is, New Brunswick, Ontario,
Saskatchewan, and soon Alberta and Manitoba, the average citizens
of those provinces will be better off with this price on pollution
than they would be had there been no price on pollution. Indeed, in
a province like Saskatchewan, where the Leader of the Opposition
is from, I can point out that families will be hundreds of dollars bet‐
ter off every year with this price on pollution. If one wanted to truly
bring down the temperature and the anxiety in the west, pointing
out that fact might actually help.
We recognize as well that fighting for better affordability for
Canadians means fighting the challenges of poverty that far too
many Canadians continue to face. That is why initiatives like the
Canada child benefit and our fight against poverty have helped in
lifting over 900,000 Canadians out of poverty over the past years.
That is something on which we know there is much more work to
be done. For every family we have seen lifted out of poverty, there
are more families we need to help. That is what we are going to fo‐
cus on in the coming years.
● (1100)
The Speaker: I was just going to suggest we break so we can go
to question period. I am not sure if the right hon. Prime Minister is
going to continue his speech afterward. I just want to clarify.
Right Hon. Justin Trudeau: Mr. Speaker, I have still four
points to make, based on what the Leader of the Opposition said. I
will continue after question period to respond to the Leader of the
Opposition.
The Speaker: I thank the right hon. Prime Minister. That was for
my clarification.
The hon. member for Durham.
Hon. Erin O'Toole: Mr. Speaker, I have a point of order. I want‐
ed to give the Prime Minister the ability to finish the bulk of his re‐
marks, so I waited to bring it up.
My point of order relates to the general practice of the House,
which is that before the government talks about the provisions that
are going to be contained in a bill, it tables the bill with this House.
The Prime Minister, in his remarks, made a specific reference to a
tax measure and the exact change he is going to bring in with re‐
spect to the basic personal exemption in a bill that has not yet been
tabled in this House.
We are talking about collegiality. I would ask the Prime Minister
to table the bill that contains the specific tax measures referenced in
his remarks, so that Parliament can review what he is talking about
as per the normal course of this House.
Right Hon. Justin Trudeau: Mr. Speaker, the initiatives I pro‐
posed are spelled out in our platform, which is there for everyone
and every Canadian to see.
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS
[Translation]
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN
Ms. Rachel Bendayan (Outremont, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, we
have a duty to commemorate one of the greatest tragedies in our
country, a tragedy that occurred in my riding of Outremont at the
Polytechnique 30 years ago today.
On that day 14 women were killed by a semi-automatic rifle.
Why? Because they were women.
[English]
We know the task before us. It is to legislate stronger gun con‐
trol, such as for the type of gun used to kill those 14 young women.
Today at 5:10 p.m., 14 white lights will shine from across Mount
Royal in Montreal where the Prime Minister and I, and hundreds of
others, will honour the memory of those victims. As I look around
this chamber at the women here and in my community, I know how
deeply that act of cowardice has failed to silence women.
* * *
POLITICAL CO-OPERATION
Mr. Scott Aitchison (Parry Sound—Muskoka, CPC): Mr.
Speaker, it is an honour and a privilege to be able to speak in the
House of Commons on the first day of this 43rd Parliament.
To the people of Parry Sound—Muskoka and to all Canadians, I
have a simple message: It is time for all of us to start working to‐
gether. We have just come off a bitter campaign, and our country is
divided. Voters are crying out for positive leadership.
In this minority Parliament, I hope we will tone down the
rhetoric, turn up the positivity and take up the good work of nation
building with things like finding common ground to bridge the
growing urban-rural divide in this country; a serious commitment
to infrastructure and housing in all communities, big and small; and
common-sense solutions to the very real challenge of climate
change.
For my part, that is the kind of positive change I sought office to
bring about. Regardless of the challenge, we need to get all levels
of government, along with the private sector, working together.
Our job together, today and tomorrow, is to ensure that we live
up to these goals.
* * *
[Translation]
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN
Mr. Steven MacKinnon (Gatineau, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, on this
National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence against
Women, I would like to recognize the work being done in the
Outaouais by wonderful and dedicated organizations.
December 6, 2019 COMMONS DEBATES 37
Statements by Members
This includes, for example, the work done by the Maison Uniesvers-femmes, a women's shelter in Gatineau, and the essential ser‐
vices the staff has been providing to women victims of domestic vi‐
olence and their children since 1979. As part of the organization's
Open Your Eyes to Stop the Violence campaign, we are reminded
that according to a 2014 study by Statistics Canada, the City of
Gatineau has the second-highest rate of domestic violence in the
country. We all have a responsibility to speak out against violence
against women. We cannot close our eyes to it.
I invite the people of Gatineau to watch the video clips the orga‐
nization has posted online and to get involved in this important
awareness campaign.
* * *
● (1105)
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN
Ms. Louise Chabot (Thérèse-De Blainville, BQ): Mr. Speaker,
we have not forgotten.
Today, December 6, we commemorate the 30th anniversary of
the painful École Polytechnique tragedy, when 14 young women
were murdered in their classroom because they were women. Still
today, tragic incidents of violence against women are far too com‐
mon. For those women, for our daughters, our mothers and our sis‐
ters, there must be an end to this violence.
“We must not forget” means that we must keep on marching,
speaking out, putting in place real measures and taking concrete ac‐
tion to eliminate all forms of sexual violence. This is a collective
effort that concerns and engages us all. It is our duty to speak out
and to take action—above all to take action—that engages all of so‐
ciety.
* * *
[English]
GEORGE SPRINGATE
Mr. Francis Scarpaleggia (Lac-Saint-Louis, Lib.): Mr. Speak‐
er, we have lost a great Canadian, a man of extraordinary talents
and accomplishments.
George Springate was a man with a big heart and a boundless
love of Canada. As citizenship judge, one of the many roles he oc‐
cupied over his lifetime, George inspired countless new Canadians
with his passionate invocation of the rights and responsibilities of
Canadian citizenship.
[Translation]
A police officer, lawyer, football player, member of the National
Assembly, professor, judge, television sports commentator, George
Springate epitomized all the opportunities that Canada offers its cit‐
izens.
[English]
George was larger than life. He was a friend to all. He touched
our lives by his friendship and his philanthropic work, which bene‐
fited so many wonderful causes and organizations.
On behalf of all members of the House, I offer his wife of 35
years, Dr. Judy Gill, our most heartfelt condolences on this pro‐
found personal loss that is shared by so many.
* * *
HARRY MCWATTERS
Mr. Dan Albas (Central Okanagan—Similkameen—Nicola,
CPC): Mr. Speaker, when the Canada-U.S. free trade deal was first
announced over 30 years ago, many B.C. grape-growers feared it
would mean tearing out the whole valley full of crops, tearing out
vineyards out of fear that they could not compete with the giant
California wine industry.
However, there was a man, a visionary man, who believed B.C.
could grow and produce the best wines in the world, and his name
was Harry McWatters, who is also known as the grandfather of
British Columbia wine.
Harry's accomplishments are far too many to mention, but suffice
it to say he was a visionary, his thinking was bold and his passion
and commitment to excellence were traits he happily shared with
those in the industry. More importantly, he was a loving husband,
father and grandfather.
This summer, we sadly said farewell to Harry, who passed away
at his home in Summerland, British Columbia. I would ask this
place to join me in recognizing an outstanding Canadian, a man
who in his own endeavours demonstrated that Canadians can suc‐
ceed and compete in an industry once thought impossible.
God bless Harry McWatters, and may he rest in peace.
* * *
LONDON NORTH CENTRE
Mr. Peter Fragiskatos (London North Centre, Lib.): Mr.
Speaker, as I rise for the first time in this 43rd Parliament, I wish to
extend sincere gratitude to the residents of London North Centre for
once again placing their trust in me to serve as their member of Par‐
liament. I am honoured and humbled by their ongoing support. I
will continue working hard to advance priorities that improve their
lives, while also ensuring London is well represented.
This includes building upon accomplishments from the last Par‐
liament: historic investments for better transportation, improved in‐
frastructure, support for affordable housing, research, job creation,
tax cuts for those who need it most, and much more.
Finally, none of us would be here without our support networks.
To my campaign volunteers, I thank them so much for helping re‐
turn me to the House. To my family and friends, their support is be‐
yond appreciated. To my wife Katy, her love and unwavering dedi‐
cation mean so much. I thank her for always being by my side.
38 COMMONS DEBATES December 6, 2019
Statements by Members
● (1110)
JEAN LEAHY
Hon. Wayne Easter (Malpeque, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, I rise today
to recognize and celebrate the life of Jean Leahy, who passed away
in August. Jean, who hailed from Fort St. John, was a tireless
champion for women's rights, farmers, seniors and the environ‐
ment.
As a farm activist, Jean served as women's president of the Na‐
tional Farmers Union and was instrumental in developing more eq‐
uitable farm property ownership for married women. She was also
a driving force behind legislation to allow farming women to con‐
tribute to the CPP.
Jean worked passionately as a member of the Peace Valley Envi‐
ronment Association to protect farmland in the Peace Valley. Rec‐
ognized as Fort St. John's citizen of the year, Jean was seen as a pil‐
lar of her community. She served as president of Save Our Northern
Seniors on the affordable housing committee, and others.
Jean would say that she wanted to make sure her grandchildren
grew up in a better world. The world is certainly a better place
thanks to Jean's life's efforts, and we salute her.
* * *
EDMONTON MANNING
Mr. Ziad Aboultaif (Edmonton Manning, CPC): Mr. Speaker,
I would like to first take the opportunity to thank the constituents of
Edmonton Manning for once again placing their trust in me as their
member of Parliament. It is an honour and a privilege to serve my
constituents in this 43rd Parliament.
This summer, I knocked on every door in my constituency. What
I heard was that Albertans were struggling to get by and the Liberal
government was not making it any easier. I heard stories from past
engineers in the oil and gas sector who lost their jobs and were still
struggling to make ends meet.
For my constituents of Edmonton Manning, I will not stop fight‐
ing for their livelihoods and their ability to support their families. I
will be their voice in Ottawa, not Ottawa's voice in Edmonton Man‐
ning.
* * *
PUBLIC SAFETY
Ms. Ruby Sahota (Brampton North, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, let me
start by thanking the people of Brampton North for returning me to
this place for another term. I am grateful for their trust in me to
move forward on our community's top priorities.
I am beginning this work today by speaking to a critical issue to
both my constituents and many Canadians: the increase in violent
domestic crime in our communities.
Over the past 10 years, 22 women and children have been mur‐
dered in Brampton as a result of domestic violence. Their names in‐
clude Lucy Wojtalski, Maria Gorospe, Christian Gorospe, Laura
Grant, Riya Rajkumar and many more. Too often they died at the
hands of someone they knew well, like a spouse or a parent.
No one should fear for their lives at home. We need our commu‐
nity and all levels of government to keep working together to pre‐
vent these horrific crimes before they occur. We must keep building
on the work we started in 2015. We must do more.
* * *
[Translation]
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN
Ms. Leona Alleslev (Aurora—Oak Ridges—Richmond Hill,
CPC): Mr. Speaker, on December 6, 1989, the entire country was
horrified to learn that 14 young women with bright futures had
been killed in cold blood for the sole reason that they were women.
There were tears and anger, and 30 years later, the sadness and
bewilderment still linger.
How can we, as a society, stand by when people are killed simply
because they are women? The pain of their loss will stay with us
forever.
We must never forget this tragedy, and every single one of us has
a responsibility to keep building a society in which all women feel
respected, are free to pursue their passions, and do not face barriers
because they are women.
We owe that to these 14 women, but we also owe it to our daugh‐
ters, to our sisters, to our mothers and to who we are as Canadians.
* * *
[English]
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN
Ms. Marilyn Gladu (Sarnia—Lambton, CPC): Mr. Speaker, I
would like to thank the constituents of Sarnia—Lambton for send‐
ing me back here to represent them in this 43rd Parliament.
Today I rise to honour and remember the victims of the tragic
massacre at École Polytechnique 30 years ago. As the first female
engineer in the House of Commons, it is fitting for me to pay trib‐
ute to these women. They were my sisters. I name them now to re‐
spect them for the strong women they were: Geneviève Bergeron,
Hélène Colgan, Nathalie Croteau, Barbara Daigneault, Anne-Marie
Edward, Maud Haviernick, Maryse Laganière, Maryse Leclair,
Anne-Marie Lemay, Sonia Pelletier, Michèle Richard, Annie StArneault, Annie Turcotte and Barbara Klucznik-Widajewicz.
We must each do more to prevent such acts of violence in our
country, especially those that specifically target women. May we
never forget them.
December 6, 2019 COMMONS DEBATES 39
Statements by Members
● (1115)
CLIMATE CHANGE
Ms. Laurel Collins (Victoria, NDP): Mr. Speaker, young peo‐
ple have been taking to the streets calling for action on the climate
crisis. They are worried about our future. They do not need more
pretty words. They need action now. They want ambitious targets, a
green new deal and the government to wake up. Instead, the Liber‐
als are hitting the snooze button, kicking targets from 2030 to 2050.
Canadians are tired of the Liberal government's empty words,
declaring a climate emergency one day and approving a pipeline
the next. The government promised to end fossil fuel subsidies but
still hands out billions to big oil and gas companies.
COP25 is a time to announce real action to invest in green jobs,
power, transit and housing; to eliminate all fossil fuel subsidies; and
to put tougher emission targets into law.
Canadians are counting on us.
* * *
[Translation]
CLAUDE BÉLAND
Mr. Yves-François Blanchet (Beloeil—Chambly, BQ): Mr.
Speaker, today I want to pay tribute to Claude Béland, a great Que‐
becker who left us on November 24 at the age of 87.
As president of Mouvement Desjardins from 1987 to 2000, he
embodied everything that is most noble and admirable about Que‐
bec.
A passionate advocate of co-operation, he is one of the reasons
the co-operative movement is more entrenched in Quebec than vir‐
tually anywhere else in the world.
He was a true humanist who believed that the economy should
serve the people, not the other way around. He was nothing like the
cold and calculating bankers we encounter far too often in the
world of finance. He loved Quebec and belonged to that great gen‐
eration we know as the architects of Quebec's Quiet Revolution,
and to whom we will always owe so much. He was the noblest em‐
bodiment of our finest qualities.
Thank you, Mr. Béland. You still inspire us, now and for many
years to come.
* * *
[English]
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN
Mrs. Karen Vecchio (Elgin—Middlesex—London, CPC): Mr.
Speaker, today we mark the National Day of Remembrance and
Action on Violence against Women. This day has been set aside to
commemorate the deadliest mass shooting in Canadian history,
which occurred at Montreal's École Polytechnique, where 14 wom‐
en were murdered. Today marks the 30th anniversary of this
tragedy. It reminds us of the daughters, sisters and friends who lost
their lives. These victims were all women with bright futures,
whose families will never have the opportunity to see them flour‐
ish.
Throughout Canada, communities and organizations are joining
together to commemorate this day and to continue our efforts to
fight for a world free of violence against women.
I would like to finish with an excerpt from a poem written by
Wadia Samadi entitled Finding Freedom.
My makeup does not cover my bruised face
My smile does not hide my haggard visage
Yet, no one comes to help
They say: it will get better
They say: don’t talk about it
They say: this was my fate
They say: a woman must tolerate
Don’t air your dirty laundry, they say.
When will this end?
* * *
● (1120)
[Translation]
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN
Ms. Julie Dabrusin (Toronto—Danforth, Lib.): Mr. Speaker,
30 years ago, I was a student in Montreal, and I still remember just
how shocked I was when I heard what was happening at the École
Polytechnique and how the attack targeted women.
[English]
Today is the National Day of Remembrance and Action on Vio‐
lence against Women. It is a day of remembrance, but it is also a
day of action.
[Translation]
Let us take action to put an end to violence against women.
[English]
Let us seek out women's groups in our communities and make
donations of our time and money to support them.
[Translation]
Let us take action to establish better gun control.
[English]
We need to have stronger controls and ban handguns and assault
weapons. That is what the survivors and families of Polytechnique
victims have asked of us, through their group, PolySeSouvient.
Let us join together as we remember the women from Polytech‐
nique. Let us not forget what we need to do. We need to end vio‐
lence against women. We need to introduce stronger gun control.
Let us do this. It is the least we can do in their memory.
40 COMMONS DEBATES December 6, 2019
Oral Questions
ORAL QUESTIONS
[Translation]
THE ECONOMY
Hon. Andrew Scheer (Leader of the Opposition, CPC): Mr.
Speaker, this morning, we learned that 71,000 jobs were lost in
Canada last month. Alberta and British Columbia lost 18,000 jobs,
while Quebec lost 45,000. This is a serious economic crisis across
the country.
Why did the government make no mention of this in the throne
speech?
Right Hon. Justin Trudeau (Prime Minister, Lib.): Mr. Speak‐
er, on the contrary, we take job losses very seriously and we will
always work to strengthen the middle class and help Canadians
prosper in an uncertain world. That is exactly what we will contin‐
ue to do.
The plan that we proposed yesterday talks about strengthening
the middle class and fighting climate change while creating new
opportunities and new jobs for Canadians, protecting Canadians
and keeping them healthy all across the country.
That is exactly what we will continue to do. We will address the
needs of all Canadians who are concerned, including those who
have lost their jobs.
[English]
Hon. Andrew Scheer (Leader of the Opposition, CPC): Mr.
Speaker, quite the contrary, the status quo is not working. His plan
is leading to jobs leaving this country. In fact, under the Prime Min‐
ister, foreign investors are rushing for the exits. Foreign direct in‐
vestment is down 56% on his watch and today's job losses are the
worst since the 2008 financial crisis.
Again, with all signs pointing to an economic downturn, why did
the Prime Minister fail to mention any of that in his Speech from
the Throne?
Right Hon. Justin Trudeau (Prime Minister, Lib.): Mr. Speak‐
er, in the Speech from the Throne we recognized the challenges
facing workers in our resource sector. With the lower prices on in‐
ternational commodities, there have been some very difficult times
for workers, particularly in the Prairies. That is why, after many
years of trying and failing by previous governments, we are moving
forward on building the Trans Mountain pipeline expansion. There
are shovels in the ground. There are thousands of Canadians newly
hired to make sure that we can get our energy resources to new
markets responsibly and sustainably.
Hon. Andrew Scheer (Leader of the Opposition, CPC): Mr.
Speaker, the Prime Minister is going to spend the next few weeks
and months trying to blame everything else, except his failure, for
the challenges facing this economy. Other countries are increasing
their investments in natural resource development. In fact, the Unit‐
ed States has gone from being a net consumer to a net exporter of
energy, so there are clearly countries around the world that are get‐
ting it right. The Prime Minister is getting it wrong.
The Montreal Economic Institute has stated that people are giv‐
ing up on Canada as a safe place to invest in natural resources. It is
seen as a very hostile environment now.
Why has the Prime Minister continued with this failed approach?
Right Hon. Justin Trudeau (Prime Minister, Lib.): Mr. Speak‐
er, the failed approach is choosing to do less to fight climate,
choosing to do less to listen to indigenous communities and work
with other communities to get things done. That approach of blam‐
ing foreign activists did not get pipelines built during the Conserva‐
tives' time in office.
What we are doing is actually getting our resources to new mar‐
kets with shovels in the ground right now. We also drew in the
largest private sector investment in Canadian history with the $40-
billion LNG Canada investment. We are going to keep working on
bringing in investment to create good jobs for Canadians right
across the country.
* * *
● (1125)
NATURAL RESOURCES
Hon. Andrew Scheer (Leader of the Opposition, CPC): Mr.
Speaker, deep cracks are showing in Confederation and the Prime
Minister has divided this country like it has never been before.
However, he has managed to unite provincial premiers around one
thing: their opposition to his failed approach on Bill C-69. Will the
Prime Minister listen to the voices of our premiers of all regions of
this country and commit to overhauling his approach on Bill C-69?
Right Hon. Justin Trudeau (Prime Minister, Lib.): Mr. Speak‐
er, as we move forward on Bill C-69, we adopted many of the pro‐
posals put forward by industry and by various parties to improve
and amend that proposition. We are looking forward to working
with all concerned partners on ensuring its proper implementation
and making improvements if necessary.
We recognize that the current approach of CEAA 2012 is not
working. If we look at the Springbank dam in Calgary and the Lake
Winnipeg outlet that are delayed under the previous process, Bill
C-69 will help in moving forward concretely.
* * *
FOREIGN AFFAIRS
Hon. Andrew Scheer (Leader of the Opposition, CPC): Mr.
Speaker, recently the Liberal government voted for an anti-Israel
resolution at the United Nations. The Prime Minister's hand-picked
ambassador to the UN even went so far as to brag that the vote
showed Canada has found its voice by opposing the only democra‐
cy in the Middle East.
Could the Prime Minister tell the House what his ambassador
meant by that?
December 6, 2019 COMMONS DEBATES 41
Oral Questions
Right Hon. Justin Trudeau (Prime Minister, Lib.): Mr. Speak‐
er, Canadians know we are a strong friend to Israel.
We maintain our opposition to the singling out of Israel, unfairly,
at the United Nations, and have voted against the vast majority of
the Israel-related votes.
Canada is committed to the goal of comprehensive, just and last‐
ing peace in the Middle East, including the creation of a Palestinian
state living side by side in peace and security with Israel.
In keeping with Canada's long-standing position, it is important
at this time to restate our commitment to a two-state solution, and
the equal rights and self-determination of peoples.
* * *
[Translation]
INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS
Mr. Yves-François Blanchet (Beloeil—Chambly, BQ): Mr.
Speaker, the Premier of Quebec and the premiers of Canada's
provinces gathered at the Council of the Federation meeting on
Monday. They unanimously called for a 5.2% increase in health
transfers.
As they pointed out, it is not the Canadian government that hires
doctors, nurses and orderlies; rather, is the Government of Quebec
that does that. However, just a few days later, the throne speech
once again reflected the federal government's firmly established
practice of interfering in Quebec's jurisdictions.
Did the Prime Minister hear the premiers' unanimous call and
will he heed that call?
Right Hon. Justin Trudeau (Prime Minister, Lib.): Mr. Speak‐
er, we were very pleased to renegotiate the health transfer agree‐
ments with the provinces a few years ago. We signed an agreement
with the provinces, including Quebec, to ensure a strong future for
Canada's health care system.
In the last election, we proposed an additional investment
of $6 billion in health care priorities, priorities that the Quebec gov‐
ernment shares with us. We will work with the provinces to ensure
that all Canadians have access to a family doctor, to ensure pharma‐
care across the country and to provide supports for mental health.
Mr. Yves-François Blanchet (Beloeil—Chambly, BQ): Mr.
Speaker, should respecting provincial jurisdictions not be the first
consideration when working with them?
Similarly, on the environmental front, all the premiers, including
Quebec's, asked that environmental assessments carried out by the
provinces and by Quebec take precedence over those carried out by
Ottawa, to ensure that the environmental protection measures are
consistent and to implement measures requiring projects to respect
the environmental priorities and issues of Quebec and the
provinces.
Will the Prime Minister refuse to listen in this case, too?
Right Hon. Justin Trudeau (Prime Minister, Lib.): Mr. Speak‐
er, on the contrary, we have often heard about the concern that du‐
plication of environmental assessments delays projects. That is why
we introduced Bill C-69, which will help us improve our collabora‐
tion and ensure greater clarity for investors and more successful
major projects. It will also ensure better partnerships on environ‐
mental matters and an understanding of the concerns of communi‐
ties, including indigenous communities.
* * *
● (1130)
[English]
PHARMACARE
Mr. Jagmeet Singh (Burnaby South, NDP): Mr. Speaker,
across Canada, people are making difficult choices every day about
cutting their pills in half or going without the life-saving medica‐
tion that they need.
[Translation]
Canadians deserve leaders who have the courage to stand up to
big pharma and to fight for a pharmacare plan that will improve
people's lives.
[English]
What is it going to take for the Prime Minister to keep his word
and to deliver pharmacare that covers all Canadians?
Right Hon. Justin Trudeau (Prime Minister, Lib.): Mr. Speak‐
er, no Canadian should have to choose between putting food on the
table or paying for essential medications.
That is why we have done more than any government in history
to lower drug prices for Canadians. We recognize that now is the
time to do more and to move forward toward national, universal
pharmacare.
However, we recognize, as the Leader of the Bloc Québécois
brought up, that there is an issue of provincial jurisdiction. That is
why we are going to sit down with the provinces and work with
them as we move forward on ensuring that Canadians can afford
the medications they need. That is the future of health care, and it is
something we will do.
* * *
INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS
Mr. Jagmeet Singh (Burnaby South, NDP): Mr. Speaker, there
is a difference between saying the right things and actually doing
them.
[Translation]
The Human Rights Tribunal ruled that the government wilfully
and recklessly discriminated against indigenous children.
42 COMMONS DEBATES December 6, 2019
Oral Questions
[English]
You are still taking these kids to court. What kind of Prime Min‐
ister does that?
Right Hon. Justin Trudeau (Prime Minister, Lib.): Mr. Speak‐
er, we agree that indigenous children who suffered through past
government policies need to be compensated, and that is exactly
what we will do. Just as we did with respect to the situation of the
sixties scoop, TB and relocations, we will be compensating those
children, now adults, for the harms they suffered.
We will be working with all parties and partners to ensure we are
compensating them justly and adequately, as we have done in past
situations.
The Speaker: I want to remind hon. members to place their
questions through the Chair. I know some of us have had experi‐
ences in some provincial legislatures where one can speak directly
across. However, I want to remind everyone that they are to go
through the Chair to place any questions or statements.
The hon. member for Durham.
* * *
FOREIGN AFFAIRS
Hon. Erin O'Toole (Durham, CPC): Mr. Speaker, my question
is through you to the Prime Minister, and I would appreciate his an‐
swering on behalf of his government.
Next week we mark one year since Canadian citizens Michael
Kovrig and Michael Spavor were imprisoned by the Chinese state
in an act of retaliation against a lawful arrest of a Chinese citizen:
12 months, two ministers, two ambassadors, zero progress.
What is the Prime Minister's plan to get our citizens home?
Hon. François-Philippe Champagne (Minister of Foreign Af‐
fairs, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, our absolute priority is the well-being
and safety of the Canadians who are detained in China. The Prime
Minister raised these cases with President Xi and President Trump
at the G20, and more recently at the NATO summit. On November
23, my third day as the foreign minister of Canada, I raised these
cases directly with my Chinese counterpart.
We have rallied an unprecedented number of partners around the
world in support of Canada's position and we will continue to raise
these cases at every opportunity. We will always defend Canadians
around the world.
[Translation]
Mr. Pierre Paul-Hus (Charlesbourg—Haute-Saint-Charles,
CPC): Mr. Speaker, there is something else that the Minister of
Foreign Affairs talked about during his trip to China. He told a Chi‐
nese media outlet that, and I quote, “In a world of uncertainty...Chi‐
na [stands] out as [a] beacon of stability, predictability, a rule-based
system, a very inclusive society.”
We know that two Canadians are currently being detained by the
communist regime in China. The Chinese ambassador even dared
to suggest that our parliamentary work could constitute a violation
of Chinese internal affairs.
Could the minister tell us whether the Chinese communist
regime is still a source of inspiration for him?
Hon. François-Philippe Champagne (Minister of Foreign Af‐
fairs, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, I thank my colleague for his question.
Canadians know that Canada is the one country on the world
stage that stands for stability and predictability, that values the rule
of law and that embodies an inclusive society. That is what people
around the world recognize.
If my colleague misunderstood comments that I made in an inter‐
view many years ago, I want to remind him today that all Canadi‐
ans know the answer to that question.
Canada is an inspiration in the international arena.
● (1135)
[English]
Mr. Marty Morantz (Charleswood—St. James—Assiniboia—
Headingley, CPC): Mr. Speaker, since 2006, Canada has stood on
principle against the annual Israel-bashing at the UN. This year, the
Liberal supported a hateful motion by North Korea, the PLO and
others. Worse still, our ambassador bragged that Canada had “found
its voice”. What exactly did the ambassador mean when he said
that?
Hon. François-Philippe Champagne (Minister of Foreign Af‐
fairs, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, Canadians know we are a strong friend of
Israel. We have maintained our opposition against the unfair sin‐
gling out of Israel at the UN and have voted against the vast majori‐
ty of these Israel-related votes.
Canada is committed to the goal of comprehensive, just and last‐
ing peace in the Middle East, including the creation of a Palestinian
state living side by side in peace and security with Israel.
In keeping with Canada's long-standing position, which has been
expressed by our government, it is important at this time to restate
our commitment to a two-state solution. We will always stand for
Israel.
Hon. Peter Kent (Thornhill, CPC): Mr. Speaker, this is not
simply a matter of another Liberal foreign policy train wreck to be
shrugged off. Canada has broken faith with the only democracy in
the Middle East, given comfort to tyrants and hate-mongers, and
betrayed the Canadian Jewish community after offering election
campaign promises of solidarity, as when the member for Mount
Royal earnestly offered that the Liberal record spoke for itself. Yes,
it does.
Is this faithlessness of Liberal Canadian foreign policy merely in
reckless pursuit of tainted Security Council votes?
Hon. François-Philippe Champagne (Minister of Foreign Af‐
fairs, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, indeed our record speaks for itself. Cana‐
dians in the Jewish community who are watching know that we are
a strong friend of Israel and that we stand up for Israel. We main‐
tain—
Some hon. members: Oh, oh!
December 6, 2019 COMMONS DEBATES 43
Oral Questions
The Speaker: Order, please. I want to remind the hon. members
to place their questions through the Chair and not directly across
when it is not their turn to speak. I am having a hard time hearing
the answer. I am sure we all want to hear the answer from the Min‐
ister of Foreign Affairs.
I will let him continue now.
Hon. François-Philippe Champagne: Mr. Speaker, I am afraid
it is more of the same. If those members were listening, perhaps
they would be able to appreciate what we are saying.
We maintain our opposition to the singling out of Israel on fail‐
ing at the UN. As those members know well, and as the world
knows well, we have voted against the vast majority of the Israelirelated votes. We will stand with Israel, and Canadians know that.
The Speaker: I want to remind hon. members on both sides of
the House that respect is a two-way street. It has to go both ways.
Blaming others for something that is not right when they are doing
it themselves, does not go over well.
The hon. member for Aurora—Oak Ridges—Richmond Hill.
[Translation]
Ms. Leona Alleslev (Aurora—Oak Ridges—Richmond Hill,
CPC): Mr. Speaker, a growing number of Canadians no longer be‐
lieve the Prime Minister when he says that Canada is back.
Every one of his international trips turns into a disaster, and the
examples are endless. Just look at his trip to India and what a fiasco
that was. His recent performance at the NATO summit is more evi‐
dence of his undiplomatic conduct.
Will the Prime Minister finally get the message and stop embar‐
rassing Canada on the world stage?
Hon. Chrystia Freeland (Deputy Prime Minister and Minis‐
ter of Intergovernmental Affairs, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, I want to
assure my hon. colleagues and all Canadians that the Prime Minis‐
ter is an excellent representative of our country abroad, especially
when it comes to our essential relationship with the United States.
I want to assure all Canadians that our current relationship with
the United States is very constructive. The Prime Minister attended
a very constructive bilateral meeting with the President of the Unit‐
ed States. This morning I spoke with Ambassador Lighthizer about
NAFTA, and I will be speaking to him again after question period.
● (1140)
[English]
Ms. Leona Alleslev (Aurora—Oak Ridges—Richmond Hill,
CPC): Mr. Speaker, Canadians are not reassured. Canadians con‐
tinue to lose confidence in the Prime Minister's ability to defend
our interests abroad. His diplomatic disasters continue to mount.
His trip to India was a failure. He angered our partners in the
Asia-Pacific. Our ties with Saudi Arabia are frozen and our rela‐
tionships with China are at an all-time low. Now his actions this
week at NATO are further evidence of his undiplomatic behaviour.
When will the Prime Minister stop embarrassing Canada and just
stay home?
Hon. Chrystia Freeland (Deputy Prime Minister and Minis‐
ter of Intergovernmental Affairs, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, I would like
to take this opportunity to assure hon. members in the House, but
above all, all Canadians, that our Prime Minister is an excellent
representative and, crucially, because this is something that Canadi‐
ans care about because it affects their daily lives, that we have an
excellent relationship with the United States, led by the excellent
working relationship the Prime Minister has with President Trump.
* * *
[Translation]
HEALTH
Mr. Stéphane Bergeron (Montarville, BQ): Mr. Speaker, in the
opening paragraphs of the throne speech, the government issued “a
call for unity in the pursuit of common goals”.
That is exactly what Quebec and the provinces did last week at
the Council of the Federation. Every single one of the premiers
called for a 5.2% increase in health transfers. Funding for the care
of our loved ones is the priority for all constituents in every one of
our ridings.
Will the Prime Minister respect Quebec and the provinces' united
front and increase health care transfers?
[English]
Hon. Patty Hajdu (Minister of Health, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, it is
an honour to rise in the House and respond to my hon. colleague's
question. First I would like to thank the constituents of Thunder
Bay—Superior North for sending me here to do this phenomenal
job on their behalf.
As the Prime Minister indicated, we have committed an addition‐
al $6 billion. We have made this commitment to ensure that every
Canadian has access to health services in his or her province or ter‐
ritory which will meet the growing needs of our country and the
changing needs of our country. Of course we will work closely with
our provincial and territorial partners to make sure those services
reflect the needs of the residents where they live.
[Translation]
Mr. Luc Thériault (Montcalm, BQ): Mr. Speaker, everyone
agrees that health transfers must go up. The government says it
wants everyone to have a family doctor. Well, give Quebec the
money. The government wants better mental health care. Give us
the means to provide it. We have the expertise.
Quebec and the provinces are unanimous: they want more money
for health care. Will the government give it to them?
44 COMMONS DEBATES December 6, 2019
Oral Questions
[English]
Hon. Patty Hajdu (Minister of Health, Lib.): Mr. Speaker,
Canadians are rightfully proud of their public health care system. It
is something that we all know is the first point of pride for Canadi‐
ans, whether they travel abroad or people visit Canada. Of course
we are going to work incredibly hard with provinces and territories
to protect this institution, to grow the institution, to meet the chang‐
ing needs of Canadians all across the country and to make sure we
work closely with provinces and territories to get it right. Canadi‐
ans are expecting us to do that on their behalf.
* * *
[Translation]
CANADA REVENUE AGENCY
Mr. Alain Rayes (Richmond—Arthabaska, CPC): Mr. Speak‐
er, during their last term, the Liberals did not do much about ad‐
dressing Quebec's specific demands, such as the single tax return,
the third link and the issues surrounding illegal immigration at the
Quebec border, to name just a few.
I have a very simple question for the Prime Minister today.
Could he tell us clearly whether Quebec is getting a single tax re‐
turn, like everywhere else in Canada? Yes or no?
Hon. Diane Lebouthillier (Minister of National Revenue,
Lib.): Mr. Speaker, the CRA employs over 6,000 people across
Quebec and is a major economic driver in cities like Shawinigan
and Jonquière. Unlike the Conservatives and the Bloc Québécois,
we have no intention of putting those jobs at risk.
That being said, we are always open to working with Revenu
Québec to make tax filing easier for Quebeckers. Though it comes
as no surprise to me, the Conservatives and the Bloc Québécois
should be ashamed of proposing policies that could jeopardize the
livelihoods of people in the regions.
* * *
● (1145)
INFRASTRUCTURE
Mr. Alain Rayes (Richmond—Arthabaska, CPC): Mr. Speak‐
er, I would like to remind my hon. colleague that the request re‐
garding tax returns was made by the Quebec National Assembly
and by all political parties, without exception.
Once again, we see that the Liberals do not want to respond to
Quebec's specific requests. Again yesterday, in the throne speech,
there was absolutely nothing regarding those requests. I will ask an‐
other question.
Could the Prime Minister clearly tell us whether he will commit
to supporting the third link project in the greater Quebec City area,
yes or no?
Hon. Catherine McKenna (Minister of Infrastructure and
Communities, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, today, as we mark the anniver‐
sary of the deaths of 14 women, I urge everyone in the House to put
their words into action.
Mobility issues are very important for the Quebec City region.
That is why will we be investing $5.2 billion in Quebec's public
transit infrastructure over the next 10 years. We know that the third
link project is very important to the residents of Quebec City and
the south shore and to their representatives. We will continue to
closely monitor this file. We are still waiting for a proposal.
* * *
[English]
FORESTRY INDUSTRY
Mrs. Cathy McLeod (Kamloops—Thompson—Cariboo,
CPC): Mr. Speaker, the B.C. forestry industry is in crisis. Thou‐
sands have been laid off and more job loss is expected before the
holidays.
The Speech from the Throne yesterday failed to mention that the
Liberals will not even acknowledge a crisis exists. The government
has failed to negotiate a softwood lumber agreement, and the Prime
Minister's antics at NATO may have destroyed any opportunity to
get a deal done.
What is the Liberals' plan to get forestry workers in B.C. back to
work?
Hon. Chrystia Freeland (Deputy Prime Minister and Minis‐
ter of Intergovernmental Affairs, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, I would like
to thank the member opposite for the very important question. The
forestry industry is an absolutely essential industry for Canada and
one that all of us are deeply concerned about.
We have been working hard with the forestry industry and with
our provincial colleagues to support the forestry industry. When it
comes to softwood lumber tariffs, we are taking cases at NAFTA
and at the WTO.
We have preserved chapter 19 at NAFTA that allows us to fight
for Canadian industry, and we are prepared to talk to the Americans
when they are ready to come to the table.
* * *
NATURAL RESOURCES
Mrs. Shannon Stubbs (Lakeland, CPC): Right, Mr. Speaker.
That is going well.
The Prime Minister said that he heard western Canada and would
“work hard to bring our country together”, but Canada is more di‐
vided than ever because of him. Still, he refuses to overhaul his an‐
ti-energy, anti-business bill, Bill C-69, which ignited the unity cri‐
sis. As recently as Monday, every single premier in this country
wanted major changes to Bill C-69.
If the Liberals are serious about dousing the fire they lit, when
will they stop their attacks on Canadians resource workers and on
provinces?
December 6, 2019 COMMONS DEBATES 45
Oral Questions
Hon. Jonathan Wilkinson (Minister of Environment and Cli‐
mate Change, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, the Impact Assessment Act de‐
livered on an important promise that we made in 2015 to fix a bro‐
ken environmental assessment process that had been gutted by the
Harper Conservatives in 2012.
The new process will put in place better rules that will ensure
that we address issues early in the process, such that good projects
will move forward and be built in this country. It is an enormous
step forward, both for the environment and for the economy.
* * *
THE ENVIRONMENT
Ms. Mumilaaq Qaqqaq (Nunavut, NDP): Mr. Speaker, I would
first like to say congratulations to you and all other members for
being trusted by Canadians in their roles here in the House. I am
honoured to be representing my territory, Nunavut.
We know that climate change is a crisis. It threatens the lives and
abilities of our hunters to provide for families and communities. We
need to treat it just as it is, a crisis. In Nunavut we continue to fight
for basic human rights: to have a safe place to live, to afford to feed
ourselves and to have clean drinking water.
The Prime Minister gives billions to oil and gas companies and
has delayed climate action for 20 years. The target now is 2050.
These companies are being put ahead of people, our people, our
Canadians. When will the government work for people?
● (1150)
Hon. Jonathan Wilkinson (Minister of Environment and Cli‐
mate Change, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, climate change is a crisis. Clear‐
ly, Canadians told us in the election that they want governments
and all members of the House to address climate change on an ur‐
gent basis. There is no area in Canada that is more affected by cli‐
mate change than the north. We must act. We must act now.
We have said that we will work, and we look to other parties to
work with us, to exceed the target that we established for 2030 and
to move toward a net-zero economy in 2050. I look forward to
working with my hon. colleagues to do just that.
[Translation]
Ms. Niki Ashton (Churchill—Keewatinook Aski, NDP): Mr.
Speaker, the planet is warming. The verdict is clear. We are running
out of room to manoeuvre. People in the North are already living
with the effects of climate change. The ice season is getting shorter
and our infrastructure is at risk.
The throne speech does not even mention this. Ending oil subsi‐
dies would have been a start, but not buying any more pipelines is
not even mentioned. In fact, I wonder what the member for Lauri‐
er—Sainte-Marie thinks about this. Clearly, he is finally discover‐
ing just what the Liberal Party's legacy is.
Why are the Liberals refusing to take action?
Hon. Jonathan Wilkinson (Minister of Environment and Cli‐
mate Change, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, two out of three Canadians vot‐
ed for serious action on climate change. This means that we must
co-operate in order to discern the best ways of fighting climate
change.
We already have a credible and affordable plan that includes 50
measures developed by Canadians for Canadians. We know that we
must do more. We want to work together with our colleagues in the
House to do more to combat climate change.
* * *
WOMEN AND GENDER EQUALITY
Mrs. Alexandra Mendès (Brossard—Saint-Lambert, Lib.):
Mr. Speaker, 30 years ago today, a man committed the most horrific
act of extreme violence against women in our history. Fourteen
young women were shot to death at École Polytechnique in Mon‐
treal simply because they were women.
[English]
Could the Minister for Women and Gender Equality tell this
House what our government is doing to ensure a safer future for
women and girls in Canada?
[Translation]
Hon. Maryam Monsef (Minister of Women and Gender
Equality and Rural Economic Development, Lib.): Mr. Speaker,
I thank my colleague from Brossard—Saint-Lambert for her ques‐
tion.
[English]
Today the names of 14 women will echo in this chamber and
across the country. Tonight Parliament Hill will be lit up with 14
rays of purple light, one representing each of the lives needlessly
taken 30 years ago.
Every day our government will work to further implement the
gender-based violence efforts we have already begun. We will re‐
spond to the calls for justice from the MMIWG inquiry. We will
work to prohibit the type of assault weapon that was used by the
Polytechnique shooter. We will work to pay women fairly, and
stand up against misogyny so that our daughters can reach their full
potential.
46 COMMONS DEBATES December 6, 2019
Oral Questions
THE ECONOMY
Hon. Pierre Poilievre (Carleton, CPC): Mr. Speaker, last
month, 71,000 Canadians went home, looked their families in the
eye and said, “I lost my job.” Half of all Canadians are $200 away
from insolvency, and the rate of insolvency is up 13% in just one
year, a decade-old record. Government taxes and regulations have
driven investment out, jobs down and the cost of living up.
When will the Liberals reverse course, get off the backs of Cana‐
dian workers and businesses and let our economy get back on
track?
Hon. Bill Morneau (Minister of Finance, Lib.): Mr. Speaker,
in fact, we will continue on the course of investing in Canadians.
We know that what we have done over the last four years in creat‐
ing jobs has been important. We also need to recognize that as the
economy goes through changes, we need to continue making those
sorts of investments.
The first action of our government will be to recognize some of
the challenges that Canadians face by reducing taxes for middleclass Canadians and ensuring that people actually have more mon‐
ey in their pockets. I am looking forward to the member for Car‐
leton voting for that, recognizing that Canadians do need more
money and that tax reductions are in order.
[Translation]
Hon. Pierre Poilievre (Carleton, CPC): Mr. Speaker, the minis‐
ter was patting himself on the back. He should have spoken directly
to the 71,000 Canadians who lost their jobs. Insolvency rates are
the highest we have seen in a decade. Rates have increased by 13%.
When will the Minister of Finance get out of his dream world
and face reality?
Hon. Bill Morneau (Minister of Finance, Lib.): Mr. Speaker,
the reality is that we need to think about how to improve our econo‐
my and make things better for Canadians. That is our approach.
We are investing in the future and in families, and it is important
that we continue with our approach. We have had success in recent
years, but we certainly face more challenges. This is why we will
look at how to lower taxes to help families in the future.
* * *
● (1155)
[English]
ETHICS
Mr. Michael Barrett (Leeds-Grenville-Thousand Islands and
Rideau Lakes, CPC): Mr. Speaker, the Prime Minister was found
guilty by the Ethics Commissioner of politically interfering in the
criminal prosecution of his friends at SNC-Lavalin. He blocked an
investigation into his own corruption at the justice committee and
again at the ethics committee. Now the Prime Minister is continu‐
ing to block the RCMP by refusing to co-operate with its investiga‐
tion.
Will the Prime Minister do the right thing and end his cover-up?
Hon. Pablo Rodriguez (Leader of the Government in the
House of Commons, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, it is the responsibility of
any prime minister to stand up for jobs across the country while up‐
holding the rule of law. We have accepted the Ethics Commission‐
er's report, taking full responsibility. We have already begun to im‐
plement the recommendations made by former attorney general
Anne McLellan.
Some hon. members: Oh, oh!
The Speaker: I am sorry, and maybe the Speaker is getting old
and his hearing is going, but I am having a hard time hearing the
government House leader. I would ask him to continue so that I
may hear it.
Hon. Pablo Rodriguez: Mr. Speaker we want to ensure that, go‐
ing forward, governments never face this type of situation again.
[Translation]
Mr. Jacques Gourde (Lévis—Lotbinière, CPC): Mr. Speaker, I
am back facing a minority government that is under close scrutiny.
We on this side of the House are not the only ones keeping an
eye on the Prime Minister. The RCMP is, too.
The Prime Minister is blocking the RCMP from obtaining docu‐
ments on his political interference in the SNC-Lavalin case.
When will the government finally co-operate and let the RCMP
have the documents?
Canadians want the truth.
Hon. Pablo Rodriguez (Leader of the Government in the
House of Commons, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, some things never
change. My colleague says the government is under scrutiny. Well,
all parliamentarians are under scrutiny by Canadians. On October
21, Canadians sent us a very clear message. They want us to work
together and try to move forward together on matters of common
interest. On that note, it is the responsibility of every prime minister
to stand up for jobs across the country, while respecting the rule of
law. We accepted the Ethics Commissioner's report and took re‐
sponsibility. We have already started implementing the recommen‐
dations of former attorney general Anne McLellan.
* * *
SENIORS
Ms. Andréanne Larouche (Shefford, BQ): Mr. Speaker, in yes‐
terday's throne speech, the government reiterated its commitment to
strengthening old age pensions. That is a good thing, something we
advocated for during the last election campaign. However, there is
something unclear that I would like the government to clarify right
away.
Does the government want to increase old age pensions for peo‐
ple 65 and older, or does it want to create two classes of seniors?
December 6, 2019 COMMONS DEBATES 47
Oral Questions
[English]
Hon. Deb Schulte (Minister of Seniors, Lib.): Mr. Speaker,
given this is the first time I have had the chance to stand and speak
in the 43rd Parliament, I want to thank the people of King—Vaugh‐
an for electing me again to represent them here in the House. I also
want to thank the Prime Minister for giving me the opportunity to
serve a very important demographic in our country, our seniors, as
Minister of Seniors.
I want to assure the member that our government has been work‐
ing on behalf of seniors since the first day it was elected. As mem‐
bers are aware from our platform, we will be looking at increasing
the OAS and at how we will do that. We committed to do that in
our platform. We will be working forward on a 10% increase at age
75. That is what we promised in our platform.
[Translation]
Ms. Andréanne Larouche (Shefford, BQ): Mr. Speaker, there
is a lot in the throne speech about seniors, but not all seniors. The
Liberals' promise is for seniors 75 and older, not all seniors. Pover‐
ty does not wait until people hit 75. For too many seniors, it is a
reality as soon as they retire.
Will the government commit to increasing old age pensions for
everyone 65 and older, or does it want to create two classes of se‐
niors?
[English]
Hon. Deb Schulte (Minister of Seniors, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, I
did hear the question and I did answer the question.
I want to make sure that I reiterate the work that we have been
doing on behalf of seniors. Earlier in our mandate, we were focus‐
ing on more vulnerable seniors. We have restored the age of eligi‐
bility for old age security and the guaranteed income supplement to
65, and that kept 100,000 seniors out of poverty.
More recently, we supported low-income seniors who work by
increasing their earnings exemption for the GIS from $3,500
to $5,000. We raised the guaranteed income supplement for single
seniors, helping 900,000—
● (1200)
The Speaker: The hon. member for Foothills.
* * *
INTERNATIONAL TRADE
Mr. John Barlow (Foothills, CPC): Mr. Speaker, agriculture
was not even mentioned in the throne speech but why should we be
surprised? The Prime Minister is responsible for Canadian farmers
losing their most important canola market.
Liberal failures are crippling Canadian farm families and it is on‐
ly getting worse. Three million acres of canola are buried under
snow, and because of the Liberal carbon tax the cost of drying grain
is skyrocketing.
When is the Prime Minister going to stand with farmers, stand up
to China and regain market access for our canola?
Hon. Marie-Claude Bibeau (Minister of Agriculture and
Agri-Food, Lib.): As we promised, Mr. Speaker, we are standing
with our ranchers and farmers. This is very important. We are
working with them through a working committee, with the
provinces and with industry. We are doing different things to sup‐
port them and to reopen the market in China.
We have started conversations through the WTO. We are having
technical discussions with Chinese officials. Ambassador Barton is
working hard in the field, and we keep working with our industries
here in Canada as well.
* * *
AGRICULTURE AND AGRI-FOOD
Ms. Lianne Rood (Lambton—Kent—Middlesex, CPC): Mr.
Speaker, our beef farmers are hurting in Ontario. Farmers are being
left in the dark about the ongoing dispute between the CFIA and
three specific beef processing plants in Ontario. The shutting down
of these plants has caused many farmers to go into crisis.
What immediate action is the minister going to take to help these
farmers impacted by the closures?
Hon. Marie-Claude Bibeau (Minister of Agriculture and
Agri-Food, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, we understand the resulting loss of
processing capacity that the closing of Ryding-Regency has had on
the beef sector and the impact this can have on farmers' income. I
can assure the member that we are working with the industry to
find other ways to support the industry. Food safety is obviously a
top priority for our government and for CFIA. We have different
programs ongoing and are supporting the industry.
[Translation]
Mr. Richard Lehoux (Beauce, CPC): Mr. Speaker, the Liberal
government has completely abandoned farmers.
Farmers across the country have many reasons to be concerned:
dairy, egg and poultry producers still have not received full com‐
pensation; inaction on China, which continues to ban imports of
western canola; uncertainty in fuel transport, which led to a
propane shortage and nearly caused a disaster in Ontario and Que‐
bec.
What does this government plan to do to stand up for our farm‐
ers?
Hon. Marie-Claude Bibeau (Minister of Agriculture and
Agri-Food, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, the agricultural industry is ex‐
tremely important to our government. We are working with every
sector.
Take supply management, for example. I would remind hon.
members that we promised to give our dairy farmers $1.75 billion.
The first cheques have already gone out to our farmers. The process
is under way. I invite all farmers who have not completed their
claims to do so as soon as possible in order to receive their money.
48 COMMONS DEBATES December 6, 2019
Oral Questions
On the issue of canola, talks with China are ongoing.
* * *
[English]
NATURAL RESOURCES
Mr. Churence Rogers (Bonavista—Burin—Trinity, Lib.): Mr.
Speaker, first of all, let me express my gratitude to the residents of
Bonavista—Burin—Trinity for re-electing me as their member of
Parliament.
The offshore industry provides many opportunities for New‐
foundlanders and Labradorians to stay in the province and find
good, well-paying jobs. It is an industry that builds our communi‐
ties and has turned our province into a hub for the creation of new
technologies and innovation.
With recent news of an expected uptake in exploration activity,
including multi-billion-dollar investments, can the Minister of Nat‐
ural Resources please inform the House on his priorities for New‐
foundland and Labrador's offshore industry?
● (1205)
Hon. Seamus O'Regan (Minister of Natural Resources, Lib.):
Mr. Speaker, Canada's offshore industry has created economic ben‐
efits that reach families in communities right across the country
through sustainable and responsible development. We do this
through strong investments, regulatory stability and meaningful re‐
lationships with stakeholders. We are ensuring that Newfoundland
and Labrador's offshore remains an attractive place to invest and
create good jobs.
* * *
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Hon. Michelle Rempel Garner (Calgary Nose Hill, CPC): Mr.
Speaker, today Canadians pay the same amount for five gigabytes
of data as an American pays for 12 gigabytes, and the difference is
even more stark compared to what a European pays. It is not fair to
Canadians who are struggling to make ends meet and it makes us
uncompetitive.
Over four years, the Liberals have always put Canada's big wire‐
less companies first, as opposed to lowering costs for Canadians
with innovative spectrum licence designs or other ways of getting
low-cost wireless access for Canadians. Why?
Hon. Navdeep Bains (Minister of Innovation, Science and In‐
dustry, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, that is a very thoughtful question on an
issue that we campaigned on. We were very clear that we are going
to reduce cellphone bills by 25%, and this is above and beyond the
actions we have taken to help consumers. We brought forward a
policy directive that makes it very clear to CRTC to make afford‐
ability front and centre. We have also dealt with consumer-related
issues when it comes to high-pressure sales tactics, which has led to
a new wireless code of conduct, as well as an Internet code of con‐
duct.
We are going to remain committed to making sure that we use
spectrum in a strategic way to help consumers.
PRIVACY
Mr. John Williamson (New Brunswick Southwest, CPC): Mr.
Speaker, U.S. Customs and Border Protection continues to open
and review Canada Post mail going to Campobello Island. Campo‐
bello is Canadian territory but is only accessible year-round by
driving an hour through the state of Maine. The ongoing mail
search by U.S. officials is an invasion of our privacy rights. It also
challenges Canada's sovereignty. It is unacceptable.
What is the federal government doing to safeguard the privacy
rights of Canadians living on Campobello?
Hon. François-Philippe Champagne (Minister of Foreign Af‐
fairs, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, this is something that the member
brought to my attention yesterday. We will be looking at this matter
and will have further things to say on it in the future.
* * *
NATIONAL DEFENCE
Mr. James Bezan (Selkirk—Interlake—Eastman, CPC): Mr.
Speaker, the Liberal government secretly slashed health care fund‐
ing for our troops, leaving them vulnerable when they need help the
most. Because of these Liberal cuts, in Ontario alone, hospitals are
out of pocket by over $10 million and may start turning away mili‐
tary personnel seeking treatment.
The defence minister owes our brave men and women in uniform
a straight and simple answer. Will he restore full funding to military
health care right across this country and reverse these callous cuts,
yes or no?
Hon. Harjit S. Sajjan (Minister of National Defence, Lib.):
Mr. Speaker, I assure this member and all members of this House
that the health and well-being of our Canadian Armed Forces mem‐
bers is a top priority.
Every member who is in need of medical services will get top
priority and the full support that is required. We are in discussions
with the province when it comes to how members are charged. We
will work with the province. One thing we will make sure of is that
for every single member, if there is a need for any type of health
care service, it will be the top priority and top class.
* * *
POST-SECONDARY EDUCATION
Mr. Tim Louis (Kitchener—Conestoga, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, I
would like to take the opportunity to thank the residents of Kitchen‐
er—Conestoga for allowing me the privilege of serving here in Ot‐
tawa.
December 6, 2019 COMMONS DEBATES 49
Routine Proceedings
There are many students in my riding of Kitchener—Conestoga
who are excited about the work of making post-secondary educa‐
tion more affordable. They re-elected us to keep working so that
more Canadians could afford higher education.
Could the Minister of Employment, Workforce Development and
Disability Inclusion share with the House what progress we have
made?
Hon. Carla Qualtrough (Minister of Employment, Workforce
Development and Disability Inclusion, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, we
know that education is vital to succeeding in our workforce. We are
investing in Canadians so they reach their full potential. We started
by giving students more support through Canada student grants. We
expanded the eligibility for student loans and grants. We introduced
a six-month interest-free and payment-free grace period, and we
lowered the interest rate on student loans.
That is not all. In our platform, we committed to further increas‐
ing Canada student grants by $1,200 and extending the grace period
to two years. This is how we are making sure that every Canadian
has the opportunity to succeed.
Ms. Lindsay Mathyssen (London—Fanshawe, NDP): Mr.
Speaker, the government talks about the importance of equal access
to university and college, but it is only that, talk. Action is needed
to ensure fair access to education based on a desire to learn, not on
an ability to pay.
While provinces are raising tuition fees and the government has
happily written off billions in debt owed by big corporations, why
is the government still gouging students and charging interest on
federal government loans?
● (1210)
Hon. Carla Qualtrough (Minister of Employment, Workforce
Development and Disability Inclusion, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, I re‐
peat, we know what a burden student loans put on Canadian stu‐
dents as they enter the workforce, and we are taking steps to make
sure that we lessen that burden.
That is why we are committed to increasing the grace period for
repayment to two years and increasing the amount of money an in‐
dividual has to be making before they even start making these pay‐
ments, from $25,000, which was an increase in our past mandate,
to $35,000 this year.
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS
[English]
PARLIAMENTARY BUDGET OFFICER
The Speaker: Pursuant to section 79.2(2) of the Parliament of
Canada Act, it is my duty to present to the House a report from the
Parliamentary Budget Officer, entitled “Economic and Fiscal Out‐
look November—2019".
PETITIONS
HUMAN ORGAN TRAFFICKING
Mr. Garnett Genuis (Sherwood Park—Fort Saskatchewan,
CPC): Mr. Speaker, I congratulate you for taking on the role of
Speaker, and I would like to thank my constituents for sending me
here again.
This petition is on Bill C-350 and Bill S-240 from the last Parlia‐
ment. They dealt with the scourge of forced organ harvesting and
trafficking. This petition is in support of legislation that would have
made it a criminal offence for a Canadian to go abroad to receive an
organ without consent and also dealt with the admissibility to
Canada of foreign nationals involved in this abhorrent trade.
There is no doubt the petitioners hope that this issue is taken up
in the 43rd Parliament and that we are finally able to get legislation
passed to address this terrible situation.
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN
Mrs. Jenica Atwin (Fredericton, GP): Mr. Speaker, this peti‐
tion calls on the House of Commons to recognize that violence
against women remains a critical problem in Canada and dispropor‐
tionately impacts indigenous women, as reflected in the crisis of
missing and murdered aboriginal women; that striving for pay equi‐
ty and equal participation for women in leadership roles must be
political priorities for all members of Parliament; and that shifting a
cultural attitude toward women and gender minorities in our society
requires structural changes to education and socialization.
HOMELESSNESS
Mr. Gord Johns (Courtenay—Alberni, NDP): Mr. Speaker, I
would also like to congratulate you on your election as Speaker,
and I thank the people of Courtenay—Alberni for sending me back
here.
I am presenting this petition on behalf of constituents from Port
Alberni, Courtenay and Vancouver Island. They cite that there are
an estimated 235,000 people in Canada experiencing homelessness
in every riding of the country. They are calling on the government
to follow through with its commitment to reduce homelessness.
They state that the government's plan to reduce homelessness by
50% over 10 years falls short. That would still leave 117,500 Cana‐
dians homeless each year, and that is unacceptable. They call on the
government to officially recognize that housing is a human right
and to develop a plan to end and prevent homelessness in Canada
once and for all.
● (1215)
VETERANS AFFAIRS
Mr. Pat Kelly (Calgary Rocky Ridge, CPC): Mr. Speaker, I too
want to take my first opportunity to speak in the House to thank my
constituents and all of the volunteers in my campaign.
50 COMMONS DEBATES December 6, 2019
The Address
I rise to present a petition signed by a number of my constituents,
as well as other individuals from many parts of Canada. They are
concerned about veterans' access medical care for PTSD and about
a change to the medical form that has made it more difficult for vet‐
erans to access this type of care. They call upon the government to
either revert to the old form or amend the existing version of the
form.
CHILD WELFARE
Mr. Peter Julian (New Westminster—Burnaby, NDP): Mr.
Speaker, on this first regular day of Parliament, I would like to
thank the voters in New Westminster—Burnaby for returning me to
this place to work on their behalf.
To this end, I present several dozen names of constituents and
representatives in cities like Chilliwack, Surrey, Langley and Ab‐
botsford who have joined with activists from the Elizabeth Fry So‐
ciety to call on the government to change the way it provides fund‐
ing for children. As we know, we have not met the standards set by
the United Nations to recognize the barriers within our current gov‐
ernment services for direct payments to family systems. Therefore,
funded services like the homelessness partnering initiative do not
provide support to all children, particularly those living in irregular
family situations where their parents are homeless or in prison.
All of these constituents join their names with the thousands of
people across the country who have already called on the govern‐
ment to regularize the system in Canada so that every child in this
country can benefit from the funding system in place and the fund‐
ing supports that exist for Canadian families.
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN
Mr. Paul Manly (Nanaimo—Ladysmith, GP): Mr. Speaker, on
this day when we remember the lives of women who were mur‐
dered in a heinous terrorist act of misogyny, I would like to bring a
petition forward to oppose gender discrimination and violence
against women.
The petitioners want the House of Commons to recognize that vi‐
olence against women remains a critical problem in Canada that
disproportionately impacts indigenous women, as reflected in the
crisis of missing and murdered aboriginal women; that striving for
pay equity and equal participation of women in leadership roles
must be a political priority for all members of Parliament; and that
shifting cultural attitudes toward women and gender minorities in
our society requires cultural changes to our processes of education
and socialization.
SPEECH FROM THE THRONE
[English]
RESUMPTION OF DEBATE ON ADDRESS IN REPLY
The House resumed consideration of the motion for an address to
Her Excellency the Governor General in reply to her speech at the
opening of the session, and of the amendment.
Right Hon. Justin Trudeau (Prime Minister, Lib.): Mr. Speak‐
er, as I said, it is extremely important that in the House we engage
substantively in robust debates, which is why I am pleased to be re‐
sponding to the Leader of the Opposition's speech in response to
the throne speech.
I have structured my speech to follow through the various points
made by the Leader of the Opposition, highlighting a few omis‐
sions in the first part of the speech.
I want to continue with many of the things Liberals are doing to
improve affordability for Canadians and address the Leader of the
Opposition's second point, which was about keeping Canadians
safe.
● (1220)
[Translation]
Keeping Canadians safe is obviously a priority for any govern‐
ment. That is what we have been doing for the past four years and
what we will continue to do.
The Leader of the Opposition talked about China. We will con‐
tinue to stand up to protect the interests of Canadians. Securing the
return of the two Canadians detained in China is obviously top of
mind. We are continuing our diplomatic and other efforts to keep
the pressure up in order to bring those Canadians home safely.
While continuing to defend human rights and express our con‐
cerns regarding the Uighur people and the citizens of Hong Kong,
and we hope to see those disputes resolved and the two-system pol‐
icy maintained, we will also be there to protect our farmers and our
exporters, including our canola producers, whom the member for
Regina—Qu'Appelle forgot to mention.
Of course we will continue to defend the interests of our ex‐
porters while working to ensure continued access to Chinese mar‐
kets.
As for Russia, which the member also mentioned, we will con‐
tinue to stand up for Ukraine and protect its sovereignty. We will
also maintain our presence in Latvia, to help protect NATO's east‐
ern flank.
[English]
We have increased our defence expenditures over these past
years. Indeed, our defence policy review, “Strong, Secure, En‐
gaged”, looks at increasing by 70% our investments in the men and
women of the Canadian Forces, because we know that being strong
abroad, being engaged in keeping peace and security around the
world, is a way of keeping Canadians safe at home.
When we talk about keeping Canadians safe in an uncertain
world, we also talk about working in partnership with our most im‐
portant trading partner, the United States. That we were able to
renegotiate a new and improved NAFTA is extremely important for
Canadians and also keeps Canadians safe.
December 6, 2019 COMMONS DEBATES 51
The Address
When we talk about keeping Canadians safe, particularly on the
30th anniversary of the École Polytechnique massacre, we also
need to talk about what we are doing here at home to keep Canadi‐
ans safe. That involves moving forward on fighting gender-based
violence, including a strong response to the national public inquiry
on missing and murdered indigenous women and girls, and it
means moving forward on gun control. Strengthening gun control is
what Canadians expect and need. We will be banning the type of
assault weapons used in the École Polytechnique massacre 30 years
ago. We will continue to move forward on strengthening gun legis‐
lation, including by giving cities the opportunities to work with
their provinces to ban and restrict handguns even further. We know
that keeping Canadians safe in their communities continues to be a
priority for Canadians, and that is why, on this side of the House,
we are resolutely determined to do just that.
The third point that the Leader of the Opposition made was
around jobs.
[Translation]
We recognize how critical a good job is to economic security and
also to the well-being of families and individuals across the coun‐
try. For that reason we are proud to say that Canadians created
more than one million jobs over the past four years. We recognize
that we still have a lot of work to do, and we will continue to do it.
Whether as a result of international trade or our actions, Canada
is now the only G7 country that has a free trade agreement with all
the other G7 countries. We will continue to create opportunities for
our exporters, our workers and our entrepreneurs to succeed in this
global market while ensuring that we make progress on trade within
Canada.
We have taken concrete action, and we will continue to work
with the provinces and territories to better harmonize regulations
and approaches to ensure better worker mobility and flow of goods
and services throughout the country. It is important for Canadians
and it is important for workers.
[English]
When it comes to standing up for our workers, when the United
States brought in punitive and unfair section 232 tariffs on Canadi‐
an steel and aluminum, we responded with countervailing measures
that ended up lifting the steel and aluminum tariffs for Canadian
workers entirely. That is standing up for workers right across the
country.
I am happy to point out to the Leader of the Opposition that part
of standing up for workers means respecting trade unions and the
labour movement in this country. We have been a solid partner to
labour over these past years and we will continue to be. A very
timely example is that we believed in the collective bargaining pro‐
cess and were able to see the CN Rail strike come to a rapid conclu‐
sion without having to take any of the measures that the members
opposite suggested around legislating against workers in that situa‐
tion. We know that working with labour unions is an essential part
of moving forward.
On top of that, we recognize that the workplace is changing and
that new skills are always needed, which is why we are introducing
the Canada training benefit, which will allow people to take courses
to upgrade their skills. Whether they are in small businesses or larg‐
er industries, they will be able to take time, covered by EI and di‐
rect grants, to up their skills and be able to stay competitive in a
transforming world. It is about reassuring people over the anxiety
they feel about whether their jobs will carry them through to retire‐
ment. We have heard that people are worried about their path for‐
ward in a changing world, and these are concrete measures to help
people out as we move forward into a world where there are going
to be new types of jobs created, and new abilities, new responsibili‐
ties and new capacities will be needed to succeed.
At the same time, we need to recognize that innovations in tech‐
nology and advances in environmental protections will require new
skills to be developed. That is why we are going to work with ener‐
gy resource industries to ensure that people have those opportuni‐
ties as we move forward.
We recognize that people are looking for and expecting a lowercarbon economy, and we need to be there for workers in the energy
industry, not just to support them but to have them able to support
this movement toward a brighter future. We know the solutions that
Alberta and Saskatchewan energy workers have put forward over
the years in improving energy efficiency and technologies and in
developing the kind of future we are living in now and need to keep
moving toward will be essential. We look forward to partnering
with workers right across the country as we build a better future,
not just for workers and their families but for all Canadians and for
the entire world.
When the Leader of the Opposition unfortunately talked about
the approach against climate activists and foreign activists, we rec‐
ognized as well that the Conservative Party is choosing to double
down on an approach that failed to get resources to new markets
under previous governments. We cannot build pipelines without
recognizing environmental responsibilities, recognizing the partner‐
ships necessary with indigenous peoples and recognizing the very
real concerns of communities across the country about how we are
moving forward. That is why we have put in place measures that
are allowing us to get the Trans Mountain pipeline expansion built.
As we speak right now, there are shovels in the ground and thou‐
sands of workers being hired to work on the Trans Mountain expan‐
sion to get resources to new markets.
The failed approach of blaming climate activists for not getting
pipelines built does not work. The Conservatives have been hurting
the west by insisting on that kind of fearmongering instead of
working together to build the projects that will get us to markets
other than the United States. We will continue to work in responsi‐
ble ways to make sure that Canadian workers have all the opportu‐
nities they need to succeed.
52 COMMONS DEBATES December 6, 2019
The Address
That brings us to the fourth point that the Leader of the Opposi‐
tion brought up, which is the impact of climate change and the pro‐
tection of the environment. Right now, across the country, we are
feeling the impacts and the costs of climate change, whether they
be forest fires, floods, changing temperatures or infestations of our
forestry areas. We know we are going to be facing more extreme
weather events. We need to both support Canadians and prevent
further climate change and extreme weather events. That will hap‐
pen by having a responsible plan to fight climate change.
● (1230)
[Translation]
We have that plan.
We need an ambitious climate plan, and that is exactly what 60%
of Canadians asked for. Furthermore, 60% of Canadians asked us to
find responsible ways to get our resources to new markets. We lis‐
tened. Everyone in the House must listen to Canadians and take
meaningful climate action.
We put a price on pollution across the country, and we made sure
that middle-class Canadians see positive changes in terms of af‐
fordability and cost of living. We must continue to help families
transition to a cleaner and greener world.
We also recognize that nature-based solutions are essential to
fighting climate change. That is why we committed to plant
two billion trees over the next 10 years and to protect 25% of our
lands and oceans by 2025. It is because nature also has an impor‐
tant role to play in the fight against climate change.
Furthermore, we know that investments in the green industry, ze‐
ro-emission vehicles and new technologies are essential. That is
why we are making Canada a global centre for innovation in zeroemission technologies by proposing tax cuts for businesses that in‐
novate in this area. We are therefore very pleased to be able to work
with the various parties in the House on an ambitious plan that will
both protect the environment and create economic growth.
Finally, the Leader of the Opposition spoke about the importance
of Canadian unity. Obviously, I could not agree more with that con‐
cern. That is why we are working with the provincial premiers, the
various parties and all parliamentarians in the House to respond to
people's very real concerns about their future, their economic situa‐
tion, their children, their grandchildren and their communities.
It will be very important to tone down the political debate sur‐
rounding those issues.
[English]
People are suffering. People are hurting. People are worried
about their future and their family's future in various regions across
the country. We need to work to allay those fears. We need to do
things like point out that the Trans Mountain pipeline is being built
as we speak, which many people in the Prairies still do not know
about. We need to move forward on getting those resources to new
markets and talk about the investments we are making.
We need to talk about the fact that the price on pollution will ac‐
tually leave families in Alberta, Saskatchewan and elsewhere
across the country better off than before we put the price on pollu‐
tion. That is hundreds of dollars more per year for average families
in Saskatchewan, Alberta, Manitoba and Ontario.
We know there is much more to do to listen to people's concerns
and work with them on reassuring them that this place works hard
for them. Anyone who is worried that minority governments are not
places where things get done concretely for Canadians need only to
look at the history of what minority governments have been able to
deliver for Canadians. Universal health care, official bilingualism,
the Canada pension plan and the legalization of same-sex marriage
all happened in minority parliaments. Therefore, there is no reason
for us in this place to not be extraordinarily ambitious in our desire
to serve Canadians.
[Translation]
Let me end with this: it is important for us to work together and
to treat each other with respect. Various parties will come up with
good ideas. In the last election, Canadians asked us to work togeth‐
er to serve them, and we can do that. That is exactly what we on
this side of the House intend to do. I think that participating in de‐
bates, listening to speeches by members opposite and addressing
their concerns directly will put us on the path to doing exactly what
Canadians asked us to do.
I am very eager to work with all MPs as we build a better future
for Canadians, a future in which they will be more prosperous,
safer, and more confident about what lies ahead in this magnificent
country.
● (1235)
[English]
Hon. Erin O'Toole (Durham, CPC): Mr. Speaker, I thank the
Prime Minister for his remarks. I have a comment and a very im‐
portant question based on them.
December 6, 2019 COMMONS DEBATES 53
The Address
The Prime Minister seems to believe, with respect to the steel
and aluminum tariffs, that his decision to impose retaliatory tariffs
against the United States somehow led to their removal. That is a
fiction. What is interesting is that, if he felt there was unfair trade
action against Canada from a trade partner, a friend like the United
States, and he imposes retaliatory tariffs against them, then why no
action against China on canola, pork and beef? Not only has there
been no retaliatory response, the government refused to even bring
a WTO trade challenge with respect to these unfair practices. He
seems to be tougher with our neighbour and friend than he is with
China, which is detaining our citizens.
The steel and aluminum tariffs were actually removed when the
Conservatives went to Washington and spoke before a committee of
100 members of Congress. In one meeting we had more members
of Congress listening to the Canadian position than the minister did
in a year. We made an agreement that we would support NAFTA
modernization in Canadian Parliament if they removed the tariffs.
They did, and we supported the bill in the last Parliament.
The agreement appears to be changing on labour and we are now
hearing about changes on pharmaceuticals. If there are substantive
changes to the USMCA, will the Prime Minister commit today to
bring it back to the House for full debate? The deal has changed. I
would note that it may change more after the Prime Minister's trip
to NATO where he was caught mocking the person we are negotiat‐
ing with.
Will the Prime Minister acknowledge his mistake in London, and
will he commit today to bringing NAFTA and any changes to that
agreement back to this minority Parliament so that we can work to‐
gether in the best interests of Canadians?
Right Hon. Justin Trudeau: Mr. Speaker, I think it is extremely
important to highlight that the work we did on protecting steel and
aluminum workers across this country was an all-of-Canada effort,
absolutely, but it was the leadership of people like the member of
Parliament for University—Rosedale who actually worked the
hardest to ensure that the countervailing measures that we brought
in on the steel and aluminum tariffs had the political impact of
moving forward with the full and complete lifting of those tariffs
with no extra conditions or punishments for Canadian workers.
That was something this government was pleased to be able to
achieve, and we do not need to engage in revisionist history on that
particular approach.
I would also correct the member opposite that, in fact, we have
launched a WTO challenge against China's actions on canola. We
are very concerned about standing up for our workers, and we will
continue to do exactly that. I would also highlight to him that we
were able to get the measures against Canadian beef and pork lifted
from China, because we know how important it is to stand up for
our exporters. It would be great for the member opposite to actually
get his facts straight before he asks a question like that.
On the issue of NAFTA, I am pleased to say that we continue to
make solid progress on it, and the changes being proposed that the
Democrats are asking for in order to secure support for ratification
are actually very much aligned with the negotiating positions that
Canada had originally asked for in the renegotiation of this NAFTA
deal. Of course, as the member well knows, the process of ratifica‐
tion requires a vote here in this House. We look forward to the Con‐
servatives' support as we move forward to protect workers right
across this country in regard to our most important relationship
with the United States.
[Translation]
Mr. Yves-François Blanchet (Beloeil—Chambly, BQ): Mr.
Speaker, I would like to point out that the member for Joliette also
went to Washington. It would be a little naive to think that individu‐
al action alone can produce results. Sometimes actions outside of
Canada can transcend party lines. Unfortunately, things are little
more complicated when it comes to blunders and human rights cas‐
es.
We have already talked about this. Every time the Prime Minister
mentions human rights, the word “Catalonia” comes to mind. Just
recently, he once again boasted about being a great friend to that
country, a country that has imprisoned people, elected officials, for
the simple crime of organizing a referendum, a country whose legit‐
imately elected president has been forced into exile. That is a hu‐
man rights issue.
I want to come back to the last topic the Prime Minister touched
on, climate change. Indeed, in the Speech from the Throne there are
a number of statements of intent that by all accounts can only be
well received. There is a willingness to take action that just might
reduce the environmental footprint of Canada's terrible greenhouse
gas emissions. I agree that it is a concern shared by all Quebeckers,
all Canadians and, I would add, all first nations. However, words
are not enough. Science has an important role to play in all this.
I am not one of those people who is going to pretend to want to
bring down the government by voting nay. Nobody wants that and
it might be a convenient way to deflect attention from certain inter‐
nal issues in certain parties. I think we should work together with
what we have. There is no way around that.
The throne speech contains some good measures. I want to high‐
light the measure aimed at making it easier to get a zero-emissions
vehicle. We can easily agree on that. There are some proposals.
Quebec is home to the only two manufacturing plants making fully
electric buses. They could help us replace our school bus fleets,
since school buses are particularly well suited to electrification.
54 COMMONS DEBATES December 6, 2019
The Address
Unfortunately, the actual effect of these measures is completely
cancelled out by Canada's steadily increasing greenhouse gas emis‐
sions, especially from oil and gas activities, sadly. This is a chal‐
lenge for science. Canada hopes to achieve zero emissions by 2050
by planting trees. However, we know full well, and the science is
very clear on this, that all of the promised new trees will not cover
so much as a decent fraction of Canada's current greenhouse gas
emissions, which seem to be on the rise.
Does the Prime Minister believe that the plans announced in the
throne speech can outweigh all of our knowledge and science,
which tell us that what is going on right now in Canada's oil and
gas sector cannot be offset by the proposed measures?
● (1240)
Right Hon. Justin Trudeau: Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the
Bloc Québécois leader for his question and for his reasonable ap‐
proach to asking questions. He is thinking about how we can best
serve all Canadians, which is our responsibility.
I want to point out that Catalonia is a Spanish domestic matter.
We will always stand up for human rights around the world. We
hope that a solution can be reached through dialogue, in compli‐
ance with the principles of the rule of law and the Spanish constitu‐
tion.
As for climate change, we agree that we must be very ambitious
with our climate plan. We must make sure that Canadians have con‐
fidence in their future and their grandchildren's future. They must
have confidence in the air that they breathe and the world that they
live in. They must also have confidence in the jobs that their grand‐
children will have and in a better future for the generations to
come.
That is why we included in our pan-Canadian climate plan an ab‐
solute cap on oil sands greenhouse gas emissions. We are con‐
vinced that, with this absolute cap, we will reach our 2030 targets.
In fact, we will exceed these targets, as we will indicate next year
when we increase them.
We will continue to work together in the House, with experts, in‐
digenous peoples and all Canadians to ensure a better future where
we will fight climate change with creative ideas from all sides. We
will ensure prosperity for everyone across the country.
● (1245)
Mr. Yves-François Blanchet (Beloeil—Chambly, BQ): Mr.
Speaker, by its very nature, the throne speech is a statement of prin‐
ciple. It contains ideas that may seem, perhaps intentionally, vague,
hazy and ill-defined.
Yesterday's speech, delivered by the British monarch's represen‐
tative at the Prime Minister's behest, is nonetheless very revealing.
A highly detailed, specific speech full of clear, costed commitments
with concrete timelines could mask its true intentions.
In contrast, if a speech is too vague, it cannot really hide just
how devoid of meaning it is.
There is clearly not much there. There certainly isn't anything
clear.
Yesterday I talked to the media about issues facing seniors and
farmers as well as what Quebec and the provinces want. Today I
will start with the most glaring omission in the speech.
I believe I speak for many Quebeckers and artists from Quebec
in pointing out that there was not a single word about the arts, cul‐
ture and the unprecedented crisis Quebec media are going through.
Not so long ago, the Bloc Québécois was the only party, like
France, that was calling for a 3% tax to be imposed on the income
of web giants. Then, one by one, every Canadian party began to
adopt our position. While just a few months ago, the Liberals and
the Conservatives saw this tax as a tax against the middle class,
now the Liberals and even the Conservatives are more open to it.
First, I would like to point out that this alone is proof of the Bloc
Québécois's relevance. Of course, we have served Quebec's artists
and media, but we are also pleased to have been useful to Canada's
artists and media.
This benefits everyone. The tax that web giants, such as Google,
Amazon, Facebook and Apple, would pay is not actually a tax. It is
a royalty, which is an amount that must be paid by anyone who is
using a product that does not belong to them for commercial pur‐
poses. Given the vulnerability of creators whose content is com‐
mercialized and pirated for advertising revenue, it is the govern‐
ment's duty to set the terms of what is, in effect, a licensing agree‐
ment.
However, the Bloc has added two criteria to this. First, any mon‐
ey collected in this way must be reserved for the arts, entertainment
and the media. Then, 40% of it must be reserved for francophone
media, entertainment and artistic creation, as is done in the music
industry.
We will not budge on these criteria. The absence of culture in the
Speech from the Throne sadly speaks volumes, as does the absence
of language. The fact that so many Franco-Canadians and Acadians
are turning to the Bloc Québécois to have their voices heard in their
language in Parliament should have tipped off the government.
They are right to turn to the Bloc. We will support all of our North
American francophone brothers and sisters whatever the future may
bring, including the creation of the country of Quebec.
As far as culture is concerned, many people lamented the fact
that the hon. member for Laurier—Sainte-Marie is not being called
to work on making Canada a nation that is a bit, even just a little
bit, greener.
December 6, 2019 COMMONS DEBATES 55
The Address
● (1250)
Personally, as someone who worked for over 20 years in the
world of arts, entertainment and news, I do not blame him. I do not
blame him for not being able to work “Canadian Heritage” into the
throne speech. Of course, for us, it would be “Quebec Heritage”
rather than “Canadian Heritage”.
That being said, I sincerely invite the member for Laurier—
Sainte-Marie to collaborate with me so we can properly advocate,
together if necessary, for the issues facing Quebec's creators, arti‐
sans and media. However, he will have to forgive me if, in conver‐
sation, I hark back to the days when he used to climb towers to
raise awareness of threats to the environment.
There is another aspect of this speech that is worth mentioning.
No one could fail to notice that the speech referred to the regions of
Canada. It referred not to the provinces, territories or Quebec, but
to the regions.
Let us make one thing clear: Quebec is not a region of Canada.
Quebec is the territory that the Quebec nation shares with several
first nations. Today's Canada is composed of provinces, territories
and Quebec.
The regions that the throne speech seems to create are the
provinces, territories and Quebec. Each one is perfectly real and has
its own legislature and government. It is the jurisdictions of these
provinces, territories and Quebec that this speech, like all speeches
written by the Liberal Party of Canada, tends to encroach on.
Canada does not hire doctors, nurses and orderlies. It is Quebec
that hires doctors, nurses and orderlies. Quebec and the provinces
called for a 5.2% increase in health transfers on Monday. The
throne speech once again exhibited the Liberal Party's habit, which
it shares with the NDP, of interfering in areas of provincial jurisdic‐
tion in a centralist Canada. Ottawa has ignored the unanimous call
of the Council of the Federation. The Bloc will not allow such in‐
terference and will protect Quebec's jurisdictions. If this also helps
the provinces, that is good.
With a similarly united voice, Quebec and the provinces also
called for environmental assessments done by Quebec and the
provinces to take precedence over federal assessments. That is in‐
teresting because the Bloc Québécois introduced a bill on that very
topic at the end of the last Parliament. Unsurprisingly, that bill was
defeated. Of course we will introduce another bill in this session, as
we promised to do. In doing so, the Bloc Québécois is voicing in
this place the will of not only the National Assembly of Quebec but
also of the provinces. Ottawa ignored the unanimous call of the
Council of the Federation on this issue, as well.
I want to make something else perfectly clear: The Bloc
Québécois was given a unique mandate.
Many Quebeckers do not identify with any federalist political
party. They are not all sovereignists, but they are nationalists. They
have left behind the years when they were made to feel guilty about
their language, their values and, generally speaking, their differ‐
ences, years during which Canada sought to erode, and even drown,
a proud and legitimate nation within its own system of multicultur‐
alism. Many of these people voted for us and told us so outright be‐
cause that is the urgent need of the Quebec nation, because that is
the current configuration of the National Assembly of Quebec, and
because Quebec needs a voice all to itself, a voice of its own.
The Bloc Québécois accepted this mandate. We will not prevent
Parliament from doing its job to prove that it does not work. We
will not attempt to make Canada more dysfunctional than it already
is to prove that it is. Even in an entirely functional Canada, the fact
remains that a nation is better represented and served when it can
exercise all of the elements of its sovereignty.
● (1255)
Let me be perfectly clear: although it may not be our focus this
Parliament, Quebeckers know that the Bloc Québécois is a sepa‐
ratist party. It certainly feels good to say that out loud.
I want to get back to those three topics. The government wants to
make life better for seniors, and so do we. We campaigned on this
topic. We proposed that seniors should get an additional $110 a
month. We believe that this extra money is necessary not only to in‐
crease the buying power of those who built the prosperous society
we now live in, but also to support Quebec's regional economies
and populations.
Unlike what is in the throne speech, our position on this is clear,
as are many other of our positions to help seniors and retirees. We
will repeat it again and again, and we will continue to explain that
if the government does not satisfy this legitimate request for our se‐
niors, they will take note and this government will soon be judged
again.
Supply management is another file that has progressed. The Bloc
Québécois cannot take full credit, of course, but it is clear that this
file, just like the web giants file, would not have progressed as
much without the Bloc. There is still work to be done, however.
Paying compensation for the first year is the right decision. Pro‐
ducers want confirmation that the conditions will be the same for
the entire eight-year payment period. Producers want to know what
the compensation will be in the wake of the free trade agreement
with the United States and Mexico negotiated on bended knee by
this government. Processors also want to know what is being done
for them.
The Bloc Québécois also called for an initiative that is important
to supply-managed producers. We want legislation to be introduced
to ensure that supply management is never again used as a bargain‐
ing chip, like it was this time around to support Ontario's auto in‐
dustry and the Canadian economy, to the detriment of Quebec's
economy. We will introduce that legislation.
Let us now talk about oil. The word oil does not appear in the
Speech from the Throne.
[English]
For those who want know what I will be talking about, it is oil.
56 COMMONS DEBATES December 6, 2019
The Address
[Translation]
Science is very stubborn. Human activity is causing greenhouse
gas emissions that continue to grow. The climate is warming. The
economic and human costs are astronomical. This is only the begin‐
ning.
Canada is one of the worst performers in the world in that re‐
spect. There is no measure to fight climate change that will offset
Canada's eagerness to increase the production, export and con‐
sumption of oil and gas for purely commercial reasons.
Science is very stubborn. We are not indifferent to the plight of
western Canadians. As world citizens, we believe that we need a
plan, not for reducing, mitigating or offsetting greenhouse gas
emissions, but for moving away from this economic model. It will
have to be done carefully, gradually, wisely and without pushing
anyone into poverty, but we need to move away from a carbonbased economy within the next few decades.
We will support any initiative that will help carbon-dependent
economies transition toward an economic model that is compatible
with the environmental issues the planet is facing.
I want to address the rude or offensive messages I am receiving
from certain parts of Canada. The example comes from the top, but
I want to take this opportunity to speak to the people of western
Canada.
[English]
I want to say for the people of Alberta and Saskatchewan mostly
that the Bloc Québécois, and for that matter something like the
whole of Quebec, offers to collaborate on a necessary transition to‐
ward an economy that will, in due course, not depend anymore on
carbon, on oil or on gas.
● (1300)
Investing in such a transition with an open mind and compassion
is an extended hand from us. However, we do not want to be part of
any further contribution to any further climatic impact of an eco‐
nomic model of the past.
[Translation]
The throne speech that was read to us reveals a lot more by what
it does not say than by what it does. There is nothing in the throne
speech about culture, language or media. There is nothing about the
fight against tax havens or about a solution to the problem that has
been plaguing the families of public servants, who are still waiting
to get their fair take-home pay. Contrary to what its name would
suggest, the Phoenix pay system is a failure that is unable to rise
from its own ashes.
While the speech does mention human rights, it fails to address
the repression of Catalonia's democracy. I want to take a moment to
quickly mention that, by nature, the right to self-determination can‐
not be subject to a constitution written by the majority or the con‐
queror with the goal of abolishing that same right. That does not
make any sense. Even Canada did not do that.
However, the Prime Minister of Canada boasts about his friend‐
ship with Mr. Sanchez and extols the virtues of the Spanish regime,
virtues that I have my doubts about. It is embarrassing. Instead, the
Prime Minister should be ensuring that the President of Catalonia in
exile, Carles Puigdemont, is able to travel freely to Quebec and
Canada to meet with people, institutions and the media. I have had
inspiring conversations with Mr. Puigdemont, and I can assure the
House that he is a very peaceful, caring man who loves arts, culture
and diversity.
The word “oil” does not appear in the Speech from the Throne,
but the debate over oil is a profoundly divisive one in Canada, pit‐
ting those who see no solution but oil against those who insist on
the urgency of ending oil dependency. Obviously, the only way for‐
ward involves collaboration and alternative technology.
I get that the Prime Minister wanted to please everyone at least a
little. I understand why, as the head of a minority government, his
approach was to offer vague promises and keep mum on some is‐
sues altogether.
The Bloc, in contrast, has such a clear agenda that people have
often asked us why we were so specific when we obviously never
intended to be the governing party. We did it because Quebeckers,
Canadians and the elected members of the House know our values
and our ideas. There will be no surprises. This is who we are. That
is why 32 Quebec ridings elected us to bring these ideas forward.
We believe in healthy, courteous dialogue, so today we are com‐
mitting to the kind of well-intentioned collaboration that will char‐
acterize our relationship the day it undergoes a profound transfor‐
mation, the kind of collaboration that will characterize our relation‐
ship once we are two equal, friendly, sovereign nations.
I therefore move the following:
That the amendment be amended by deleting all the words after the words “na‐
tional unity crisis, which requires” and substituting the following:
“respecting provincial jurisdiction, in particular by not authorizing any project
that does not comply with provincial and Quebec laws relating to environmental
protection and land use planning;
(d) underfunding of the health care system, which requires an increase in trans‐
fers;
(e) an unprecedented crisis facing media and creators, who must be supported
through the imposition of royalties on web giants; and
(f) loopholes in the supply management system that must be protected by legis‐
lation”.
The Speaker: The questions were a little long after the last
speech. This is problematic, because I want all the parties to have a
chance to ask a question. I would therefore ask members to ask
shorter questions. Ideally, members have a minute and a half to
speak. I hope I will not be forced to cut members off in the middle
of their question.
● (1305)
Ms. Emmanuella Lambropoulos (Saint-Laurent, Lib.): Mr.
Speaker, this being my first time speaking in the House in the 43rd
Parliament, I want to thank my constituents in Saint-Laurent for
trusting me to represent them in the House for a second term.
[English]
I thank all my constituents in Saint-Laurent, all the volunteers
who helped with my campaign and all the donors who made this
possible.
December 6, 2019 COMMONS DEBATES 57
The Address
[Translation]
Canada and Quebec both know that fighting against climate
change is very important. Quebeckers know this better than anyone.
This issue is the government's priority.
I would like to ask the leader of the Bloc Québécois and his party
whether we will be able to count on their support when we put en‐
vironmental policies in place.
Mr. Yves-François Blanchet: Mr. Speaker, I am overjoyed to
answer yes.
I will even go further. When measures are proposed that could
potentially have a real impact on reducing greenhouse gas emis‐
sions to fight climate change, we will be there. We have even pro‐
posed some ourselves, including a bold law that would require
Canada to meet its own targets, which amount to nothing more than
a slogan right now.
We will go further. We will also tell Canada to stop being incon‐
sistent and stop being a petro-state that emits far more than its share
of greenhouse gases while it tries to hide that fact behind a facade
of climate action. If they do not mind, we will keep the facade and
make a smart, gradual move away from oil.
Hon. Pierre Poilievre (Carleton, CPC): Mr. Speaker, I was told
that the Bloc Québécois was a sovereignist party. That is why, for
15 long years, I was so surprised to hear the demands of the Bloc
Québécois in this place. It calls for federal programs to help the
media, federal programs for culture and more generous federal
equalization programs. Now it is also demanding broader environ‐
mental programs, which are still federal programs. Those programs
give the federal government the authority to get involved in the en‐
vironmental decisions of the provinces, even outside Quebec.
I find it very interesting that this party is called the Bloc
Québécois. It should be called the “Centralist Bloc”, because day
after day it keeps calling for an increasingly large and costly federal
government.
Will the leader of the Bloc Québécois therefore accept the new
title that I am proposing, namely leader of the “Centralist Bloc”?
● (1310)
Mr. Yves-François Blanchet: Mr. Speaker, I would gladly agree
to that if the Conservative Party would agree that, from now, we
will say that there are two conservative parties, many conservative
parties, fragments of conservative parties. However, as I just ex‐
plained, the Bloc Québécois is a separatist party. If we are that an‐
noying, then people need to stop lying to everyone and let us leave.
It is quite simple.
Obviously, there is some propaganda going on here since that is
part of politics, but if we are such a heavy and disagreeable burden
with the bad habits of speaking French and not wanting public ser‐
vants in positions of authority to wear religious symbols, then we
can come to some other sort of agreement. Canada can sit on one
side of the table and Quebec on the other, and, as two sovereign na‐
tions, we can come to an agreement that would likely be more pro‐
ductive than the current situation.
However, in the meantime, last time I checked my pay stub, I
was still paying taxes in Canada so, as long as Quebeckers are pay‐
ing taxes in Canada, Quebec will claim, require and occupy more
and more seats on this side and maybe a few more on the other side
too, if no one minds.
Mr. Alexandre Boulerice (Rosemont—La Petite-Patrie,
NDP): Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the member for Be‐
loeil—Chambly on being elected, on his first questions here today
and on his speech.
Throughout the entire campaign, the Bloc Québécois presented
itself as the greatest defender of Quebec's interests. That practically
became their trademark. Sometimes they even made it seem they
had a monopoly on defending Quebec's interests.
When the Liberal government brought down its throne speech
yesterday, the Leader of the Bloc Québécois rushed to the mic to
say that he would support the throne speech delivered by the Liber‐
al Party of Canada. That is a mystery. I thought it must have includ‐
ed some amazing gains for Quebec. There must have been some‐
thing in there in the best interests of Quebeckers that we simply
missed.
Compensation for supply-managed producers was announced be‐
fore. As for the suggestion that oil was not mentioned in the throne
speech, I just want to say that when the Liberals talk about diversi‐
fying export markets for natural resources, they mean the Trans
Mountain pipeline.
Still, there was no mention in the throne speech about setting
higher greenhouse gas reduction targets for 2030, nothing for the
aerospace industry or the Davie shipyard, no employment insurance
reform, nothing about taxing web giants, nothing about the crisis
plaguing local and regional media, no pledge to tackle tax havens
and no response to any of the Quebec government's demands.
That brings me to a very simple question: How can the leader of
the Bloc Québécois vote in favour of a throne speech that does not
even include the word Quebec?
Mr. Yves-François Blanchet: Mr. Speaker, I would say that we
are essentially doing the NDP a favour. However, I thank the mem‐
ber for Rosemont—La Petite-Patrie for reiterating the essence of
my speech. Not too long ago, the NDP had a virtual monopoly on
the interests of Quebec. There is not much left.
It would be intellectually dishonest to claim that everyone who is
not on the other side would want to get back in election mode to‐
morrow morning. No one would benefit if we failed to fulfill the
mandate given to us by Canadians and Quebeckers. This means that
we must try to work together.
This will, of course, be difficult in some instances. I do not be‐
lieve that we will agree with the Conservatives tomorrow morning,
but we do have a duty. I would even say that in some respects we
are not too far off from the NDP, aside from the party's centralizing
tendencies. We are able to work with everyone.
58 COMMONS DEBATES December 6, 2019
The Address
I also see a lot of common ground with the Green Party agenda.
We are able to work together and that is what Quebeckers have
asked us to do, without abandoning Quebec's demands. I am not
sure where the hon. member was, but I talked about those demands
in every one of my speeches. We will keep raising the demands and
the consensus of Quebec's National Assembly with the federal Par‐
liament because until further notice, some topics that affect Quebec
fall under federal jurisdiction.
● (1315)
Mr. Steven MacKinnon (Gatineau, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, on be‐
half of the government party, I sincerely welcome our colleagues
from the Bloc Québécois and of course their leader. We thank him
for his support for the government's agenda and his vote in favour
of the Speech from the Throne. We appreciate his reaching out to
the government and the Liberal Party in a spirit of collaboration.
Today is not the day to engage in partisanship. There will be
enough time for that. We simply want to welcome him and say to
him that on election night it turned out that Quebec chose us both.
Mr. Yves-François Blanchet: Mr. Speaker, here is our modus
operandi: preaching by example, even though I have not always
been perfect, and demonstrating that Parliament really can be a col‐
laborative space. It is the same kind of collaboration, the same kind
of attitude we will adopt the day we agree to sit across the table
from each other to talk about our needs, our hopes and our demands
so that, as friends, we can define the things it can be hard to define
when we have to share a room and one of us snores.
There will be an agreement one day, and when that day comes,
we will continue to be extraordinary partners and collaborators.
[English]
Mr. Jagmeet Singh (Burnaby South, NDP): Mr. Speaker, the
Prime Minister and the Liberal government touched on a number of
important areas in the throne speech, but they just touched on them.
They touched on the climate crisis, but they did not include any
new targets. They did not include any new commitments to boldly
tackle the crisis that we are in.
[Translation]
They said it is a crisis, but they did not come up with any bold
measures to tackle it.
[English]
The Liberals did not mention in the throne speech something that
in the past they promised to do, which is to fully end all fossil fuel
subsidies. There is no path to achieving something that they com‐
mitted to. The Liberals touched on the climate crisis, but they did
not deliver on any sort of vision to achieving meaningful action to
tackle it.
We want to fight the climate crisis like we want to win it. For the
kids we met who were fighting in the streets in the climate actions
that took place across Canada, where thousands and thousands of
people said they need and they demand more action, the govern‐
ment has not delivered.
The Liberals touched on health. They touched on pharmacare, a
very important issue, but they just touched on it. In fact, the way
the throne speech rolled out, the government mentioned national
pharmacare, a step back from what it proposed during the cam‐
paign, which was universal pharmacare. To be clear, I do not expect
a 15-point plan in the throne speech, but I do expect that the gov‐
ernment would, at a minimum, accept its own report commissioned
by the government and written by Dr. Hoskins, which states that the
way to move forward that will help out all Canadians is a universal,
single-payer pharmacare for all. This means that no matter where
they live in this country, there should be no barrier for those who
need medication.
● (1320)
[Translation]
People in this country need medication. We need a system that
enables everyone to access medication.
[English]
What we are proposing is this. If people need medicine, no mat‐
ter where they live in this country, they should use their health card,
not their credit card. This is something we can achieve. We are the
only country in the world that has a universal health care system
that does not include access to medications.
We know that by doing this we can address some of the concerns
raised by premiers. By having access to a universal medication pro‐
gram, everyone could get the medication they need and we would
save money for the federal government and for the provinces. It
would also save money for businesses. It would make Canada more
competitive and it would help out millions of Canadians, some of
whom have coverage but, because the deductibles are so high, they
effectively do not have coverage. For the millions of Canadians
who do not have coverage at all, this would mean such a difference
in their lives.
While campaigning, I met many people who talked about those
stories. They told me they spend thousands of dollars on medica‐
tion each month, which means tens of thousands of dollars a year. I
met people who said they cannot afford medication. Therefore, they
gamble with their lives every day because they cannot afford the
heart medication that they need. We know what happens when peo‐
ple cannot treat an illness. They get more and more sick and end up
in the hospital, putting further strain on our health care system. We
could avoid all this with a universal health care system that in‐
cludes medication coverage.
December 6, 2019 COMMONS DEBATES 59
The Address
The Liberal government touched on student debt. This is a very
important issue, but the Liberals just touched on it. The government
is profiting from student debt. There is a question of choices. The
Liberal government chose, last year, to waive billions of dollars, as
much as $7 billion, in corporate debt. It waived that entirely. How‐
ever, on the backs of students, over four years, the Liberals
made $3 billion in interest. While the Liberals talked about student
debt, a simple step they could have taken is to say that they would
do what is right and waive the interest on student debt.
[Translation]
The time for talk is past. Now it is time to take concrete action.
I agree that the government is addressing important issues, but it
is not doing enough. We need concrete action now to help people
tackle the climate crisis and to help students pay back their loans.
[English]
The Liberal government touched on cellphone and Internet ser‐
vices and said that it would take steps to make them more afford‐
able, something I support and is encouraging. Its attempt to do that
is basically to have a conversation with the cellphone companies.
However, having a conversation is not going to lower the cost of
cellphone services.
Just to put a point on this, in Canada we pay some of the highest
cellphone and Internet fees in the world, and it is not a coincidence.
Governments have allowed the telecommunication companies to do
so. The New Democrats proposed a solution that did not make its
way into the throne speech, a very clear solution, fully within the
federal government's mandate. We have the power to do this. In
fact, other jurisdictions around the world have done the very same
thing, with great success, by putting a price gap in place. If our
price is so high, let us put a price gap in place like the United States
and Australia have done. The result is that it drives down the cost
of cellphone services.
To highlight how important this is, we know in this modern age,
access to Internet and cellphone services is not a luxury; it is a ne‐
cessity. People need it for work. People need it for their education.
People need the Internet to access services for their families. The
cost of cellphone and Internet services is impeding people in their
day-to-day lives. It is hurting families that need it for work, for edu‐
cation and for accessing services and the government has the op‐
portunity and the power to do something about it.
However, in the throne speech, I was not expecting a 20-point
plan, but I was expecting the government to say that it understood
something needed to be done. Canada is paying the highest rates in
the world and there is no excuse that makes sense. We are a large
country; so is Australia. We have remote communities; so does Fin‐
land. Both places have far cheaper prices for cellphone and Internet
services because the government did what we expect government to
do. When an industry takes advantage of people, then government
has to stand up and defend them.
Canadians are seeing the Liberals defend the profits of the pow‐
erful industries instead of helping people and families that actually
need their assistance. That is why their priorities are wrong.
There are some things that the government went beyond just
touching on. It did include some more details on justice for indige‐
nous people. I acknowledge the government touched on truth and
reconciliation, which is incredibly important, and we have to imple‐
ment the recommendations. The New Democrats are committed to
doing that and we are going to ensure the government actually does
it.
We have seen for far too long that the Liberal government is
great at announcing things and making promises, but not so good at
following through on those. We know we need to go beyond that.
It was also very encouraging to hear the government mention not
only the calls to action, but also the recommendations put forward
by the National Inquiry into Missing and Murdered Indigenous
Women and Girls, which is incredibility important and would save
lives. It is vital that we do not just mention it but follow through by
implementing those important recommendations.
Where I fail to follow the logic is when the government talks
about the importance of following through on these vital recom‐
mendations and calls to action, but at the same time continues to
take indigenous kids to court. It continues to delay the funding the
Canadian Human Rights Tribunal has pointed out is not just dis‐
criminatory, but wilful and reckless.
● (1325)
[Translation]
The Canadian Human Rights Tribunal stated that the current
government wilfully and recklessly discriminated against indige‐
nous children. Therefore, it must immediately stop taking indige‐
nous children to court.
[English]
I cannot wrap my head around how a government can, on one
side, talk about the importance of reconciliation, of justice and of
fairness, while on the other side, ignore a Human Rights Tribunal
ruling, delay funding to end discrimination and continue to take in‐
digenous kids to court. Those two things do not coincide. They do
not make sense. That is why I will continue to call on the Liberal
government to stop taking these kids to court, to pay the fee that is
required to ensure that justice is served and to make sure that this
injustice ends, that the kids who have been discriminated against
have fairness in their lives, and that no other kids face this unfair‐
ness in the future.
The impact of this discrimination is not an academic discussion.
It is not just the fact that there was discriminatory funding. Indige‐
nous children have died because of the lack of funding and they
will continue to die unless the government does something about it.
60 COMMONS DEBATES December 6, 2019
The Address
The government did put one encouraging addition in the throne
speech. It accepted what we have been pushing for, which is nation‐
al dental care, and that is vitally important.
When we were in communities across this country, we spoke
with people who were deeply concerned about health care and the
cost of medication. Many people could not imagine a future where
they could get dental services. There are so many people right now
who do not consider it an option to take care of their teeth. Dental
care is one of the major gaps in our health care system. People can
go into the hospital if emergency surgery is required for their
hearts. They could have complex surgery that would put them back
together involving their entire body, their lungs, issues with the
joints, but if they have a problem with their teeth they have
nowhere to go. Millions of Canadians do not get the dental care
they need, yet we know that unhealthy teeth can impact the rest of
their health.
During the campaign we called on the Liberal government and
all Canadians to imagine a future that included a national dental
care program. It can be achieved. We can do it and it would not cost
us too much money. The plan the NDP has laid out and that we are
asking the government to consider would be less than $1 billion a
year and could cover 4.3 million Canadians immediately. It would
be a federal program that would cover Canadians across this coun‐
try and give them access to dental care. It would mean a massive
change in people's lives.
I remember a woman on the streets of Vancouver who ran up to
me and said she had heard my announcement on dental care, and
her hand was covering her mouth. She said that she was so embar‐
rassed of her teeth and she had not been able to afford dental care.
She was stuck in a job and was too afraid to apply for a new job
because she did not think anyone would hire her with the way she
looked. She was afraid to go out in public. She said she was even
afraid to talk to me because of her teeth. She should not have to feel
that way. She should not have to worry about the way her teeth
look. However, this is the reality for far too many Canadians who
cannot afford dental care and whose teeth are not in a healthy state.
We know this impacts overall well-being. We know this impacts
overall health. We have to do something about it.
While it is encouraging that the government mentioned it, if you
read between the fine lines it says that national dental care is some‐
thing that Parliament should explore. I call on the government to
take a step toward ensuring we have national dental care. That is
what we need.
There is a path forward. While we New Democrats are not satis‐
fied with what we heard in the speech, we do not lack confidence in
the government simply because we do not think it is good enough.
We have met with people and spoken to people across this country,
and they have told us that this is not good enough. This is not going
to make sure people's lives get better.
● (1330)
One of the most pressing crises people are faced with in their
lives is housing. The government said in the throne speech that it is
going to continue to do what it is doing on housing. What does that
mean? That means the Liberals will continue to spend 19%, as a
portion of GDP, less than the Conservatives before them.
How can they claim that they are doing something to tackle the
crisis when they are spending less than the previous Conservative
government? They continually said in their campaign that Canadi‐
ans should be afraid of the Conservatives because they would make
things worse, but the Liberals are doing worse than they did.
The crisis people are faced with in this country is such that peo‐
ple cannot find places to live. In large cities across the country,
young professionals and families and people who earn good
salaries cannot find places to rent, let alone buy. In rural communi‐
ties, people cannot find anything, rental or housing.
It is not even a question of affordability in some communities. It
is a question of availability. There is just nothing there. People are
living on the streets. There is homelessness and people who need
supported living, and the government thinks that it is okay to con‐
tinue to do what it is doing. It is not okay. It is not going to make
people's lives better, and it is because it is not going to make peo‐
ple's lives better that New Democrats are saying it is not good
enough.
However, here is the thing. I am calling on the Prime Minister
and the government to sit down and have a chat with us. If Liberals
want to make life better for Canadians, we are ready to work with
them. If the Liberals want to stay in power, it is clear they have
some options.
If they want to make things better for Canadians, if they want to
lift up people who cannot find housing, if they want to lift up peo‐
ple who cannot afford their medications, if they want to make a real
difference in people's lives and implement national dental care then,
yes, they can count on New Democrats.
However, if they think this throne speech is good enough, it sim‐
ply is not. I know you can do better, but you are not going to do it
on your own. That is why New Democrats are here. We are going
to push you. We are going to make sure you do it right.
● (1335)
The Speaker: I am sorry to interrupt. I know the hon. member
comes from the Ontario legislature where members are allowed to
say “you”. In this House, “you” means the Speaker. I can assure the
member that I will not be taking part in a lot of the stuff that is tak‐
ing place on the government side. I am neutral. I want to make sure
the hon. member speaks through the Speaker and not to the Speak‐
er. I would not want to let the member down.
The hon. member for Burnaby South.
Mr. Jagmeet Singh: Mr. Speaker, I have no doubt in your ability
to keep the House moving and make sure things are fair. Thank you
for that clarification.
December 6, 2019 COMMONS DEBATES 61
The Address
In closing, I want to again point out that there is a powerful op‐
portunity.
[Translation]
We now have an opportunity to work together to make progress
on issues that will improve the lives of people, and that is our goal.
That is what we want to do for all Canadians. We know that Que‐
beckers and Canadians—all people across Canada—want to move
forward together, and we can do it. We have a plan and, if the gov‐
ernment wants to implement a plan to truly improve people's quali‐
ty of life, we will be its partner. However, if it only wants to remain
in power, it should not count on us.
We can do what needs to be done, but every time we take action
we must think of how it will help ordinary Canadians.
[English]
That is going to be New Democrats' focus in this Parliament.
That is going to be our focus in all of the work we do. We are fo‐
cused on one thing: making sure that government works for people,
not for the powerful; that government works for families, not for
the powerful corporations. We are here for the people who need
help the most and we are going to continue to fight for them.
Mr. Kevin Lamoureux (Winnipeg North, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, I
have had the opportunity for almost 20 years of being an MLA in
the Manitoba legislature. When I was the health care critic, one of
the important issues was medicines.
For the first time, in the last three or four years, we have a na‐
tional leader, who happens to be the Prime Minister, and a govern‐
ment that have made significant moves toward a national medicare
system for prescribed medicines. The constituents I represent and, I
believe, Manitobans and Canadians as a whole, would love to see a
national pharmacare program. It is something our ministers of
health have been working diligently to put in place.
Would the Leader of the New Democratic Party acknowledge,
especially as he was a provincial legislator previously, that Ottawa
cannot do it alone? There is an obligation on our part to work with
the provinces and other stakeholders to ensure we implement a tru‐
ly national program.
We could click our heels and do all those wonderful things, but
until we recognize there needs to be that co-operation among differ‐
ent levels of government, it will be extremely difficult to achieve
what we on this side want and what Canadians want.
Would the New Democratic leader agree that there is an obliga‐
tion to work with the provinces to get a national pharmacare pro‐
gram?
Mr. Jagmeet Singh: Mr. Speaker, we absolutely need to work
together to achieve anything in this country.
In order to make advancements in health care, we absolutely
need to work with our provincial partners, provincial premiers and
governments. However, here is the thing. To be able to work to‐
gether with provinces, we need to have a vision, and the federal
government has not provided that clear vision.
One of the things the government could do very easily is accept
its own report. The government commissioned a report. The report
found that the best way to ensure we implemented pharmacare was
to ensure that everyone in the country was covered. To me it seems
pretty simple. The government could say yes, that is will move to‐
ward national pharmacare, and this is what that means. It could say
that it will accept the report that it commissioned.
The report backs up what all experts are saying, that if we want
to lift up people, save money for provinces, save money for the fed‐
eral government so it can reinvest in health care to ensure people
get the type of health care they need, it has to be a type of pharma‐
care that covers every Canadian, that is public, single-payer and
truly allows us to take on the powerful pharmaceutical companies.
I am asking the government to do that. We need to work together,
but the federal government has to provide leadership. Right now
that leadership is lacking. I am going to push the government to
provide the right type of leadership to achieve the right type of
plan.
● (1340)
Mr. Warren Steinley (Regina—Lewvan, CPC): Mr. Speaker,
as this is the first I am able to rise in the 43rd Parliament, I want to
thank my constituents for putting me here, I want to thank my wife
and my family for allowing me to do this job. I also want to thank
everyone who gave me their confidence to represent them in the
House of Commons.
The New Democratic leader talked about hard-working Canadi‐
ans. I have 1,000 hard-working Canadians at the EVRAZ steel
plant in Regina. These constituents are wondering if they can get
support from the NDP to ensure those good-paying jobs stay in
Regina. These Canadians make a world-class product. They do a
fantastic job. They make some of the most environmentally sound
steel in the world. They have great technology, ensuring their steel
is at the top of environmental standards.
Will the New Democratic leader use his position to ensure these
hard-working Canadians have good-paying jobs now and into the
future?
Mr. Jagmeet Singh: Mr. Speaker, my congratulations to the
member on his election.
Absolutely, we need to support families and working people
across the country. The company that the member is speaking about
produces some of the best steel in the world. However, ensuring
that those jobs remain in Canada is a problem.
62 COMMONS DEBATES December 6, 2019
The Address
The problem is that many of the projects that the member's party
speaks about do not require Canadian-made products. The problem
is that without making sure or requiring that Canadian infrastruc‐
ture uses Canadian steel or Canadian workers, it is meaningless to
talk about infrastructure projects. We need to make sure that the in‐
frastructure projects that we are moving forward with require
made-in-Canada content.
I would go beyond that. Something we announced during the
campaign and now continue to push for is to make sure our manu‐
facturing sector is strong in Canada. I believe that when we are us‐
ing public procurement and using public dollars to purchase some‐
thing for public Crown corporations, we should require made-inCanada content there as well. Without the stipulation that made-inCanada content is required, those good hard-working people at
EVRAZ steel will not get jobs. If it is simply a question of making
infrastructure without requiring that the jobs remain in Canada and
that there be a benefit to Canadians and a benefit to Canadian work‐
ers, then no, they will not get the jobs.
However, that is why we have New Democrats. It is because we
are not going to talk about infrastructure unless we talk about bene‐
fits to communities and jobs in communities. We require made-inCanada content because we are proud of Canadian workers and we
want to make sure that they get to work and that we get the benefit
of their quality products.
[Translation]
Mr. Yves Perron (Berthier—Maskinongé, BQ): Mr. Speaker, I
would first like to address the people of Berthier—Maskinongé and
thank them for putting their trust in me. I will do my best to fulfill
my responsibilities.
My colleague from Abitibi—Témiscamingue did a good job of
raising this issue yesterday. The throne speech contains statements
about compensation for the agricultural industry. We will work to‐
gether to ensure full compensation for the farmers in every agricul‐
tural sector who were sacrificed in the trade agreements signed.
However, there is something important missing from the throne
speech. It does not include any guarantee that the government will
never again touch supply management. The Bloc Québécois intends
to put forward proposals in that regard. We intend to be very proac‐
tive. The government's response yesterday seemed evasive to me.
Quebec has an outstanding and effective system for ensuring that
our farmers have a decent standard of living while providing high
quality products at stable prices. The Bloc Québécois thinks that we
should promote this system abroad instead of using it as a bargain‐
ing chip.
Can we count on the support of the New Democrats as we try to
get this minority government to act in the interests of the common
good, for the greater benefit of our farmers and to preserve the fu‐
ture of our local agricultural model, which is the best in the world?
● (1345)
Mr. Jagmeet Singh: Mr. Speaker, farmers can count on us. It
was our party that said that agreements with other countries must
protect supply management. That aspect is missing from the new
NAFTA. We had pointed out three problems with that agreement.
First of all, the measures to protect workers and the environment
are not binding. Second, it will raise the cost of drugs. The third
problem has to do with the breaches in supply management. This is
completely unacceptable, and that is what the government is doing.
It talks about the importance of farmers, but it does not walk the
talk. Breaches in supply management have hurt our dairy farmers,
especially in Quebec.
The member is right, however, when he says that we also need to
think about all of the producers across agricultural sectors. This is‐
sue is especially important to me, since my parents were farmers.
We must always protect our farmers, for they are the ones who feed
the entire country. If we want to have a sovereign nation, we must
have a strong agricultural sector, and the NDP will always protect
and promote our agriculture.
[English]
Hon. Wayne Easter (Malpeque, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, I am very
pleased to take this opportunity to say a few words on the Speech
from the Throne, but first I want to recognize your election as our
new Speaker. I congratulate you and wish you well in a Parliament
where I think there is a real opportunity to do great things for Cana‐
dians. There is a real opportunity to come together as members of
Parliament.
I firmly believe that every party has some good ideas in its plat‐
forms. We have to draw those out and work together, because
Canadians sent us a message that they want this Parliament to
work. They do not want to see the kind of division that we saw dur‐
ing the election campaign, the personal attacks and the misinforma‐
tion that seemed to filter out in the election, which was unbeliev‐
able. They want to see us work together in the interests of all Cana‐
dians. The leaders of all parties and all of us as parliamentarians
need to try and achieve that in this 43rd Parliament. I wish you
well, Mr. Speaker, in your endeavours trying to manage that.
I also give my thanks to the people in the riding of Malpeque,
Prince Edward Island, for their support. This is my ninth term that I
have been fortunate enough to be a member of Parliament and it is
always an honour. No matter how often one gets up to speak here,
this place is somewhat intimidating. Not many people get the right
to stand here and state their remarks, challenge others in debate and
be challenged themselves by others who may question them. This is
what democracy should be all about, the give and take within a Par‐
liament where there are views on all sides, but we come together
and as a result make better policy.
December 6, 2019 COMMONS DEBATES 63
The Address
I think that the debates in this place were more open quite a num‐
ber of years ago. They were more forceful and not always written
by speech writers and others. That is the kind of place I really be‐
lieve this place should be, where we get up and spout our ideas,
even though we may have to give up on some of them. When I first
came here 26 years ago, I thought I had all the ideas and all the an‐
swers. I know today that I did not. In fact, I have fewer answers to‐
day than I thought I did then. However, we need to have that dis‐
cussion and that debate, because everybody has some good ideas,
and constructive criticism is what should take place in this parlia‐
mentary chamber and in committees.
For the new members here, it really is at committees where the
work gets done. At committee, we travel together and get to know
each other on a more personal level. Away from the partisanship
and party lines, that is when the real work gets done, when ideas
come out. We build friendships across the aisle, which is two sword
lengths wide. We build friendships and move forward together.
That is what this place should be all about. I hope in this 43rd Par‐
liament that is what we can do in this chamber and at committee.
I will now turn to the throne speech and read a few sentences
from the opening:
This fall, Canadians went to the polls. And they returned a minority Parliament
to Ottawa. This is the will of the people, and you have been chosen to act on it.
And so we open this 43rd Parliament with a call for unity in the pursuit of com‐
mon goals and aspirations.
● (1350)
As I said a moment ago, I know this will be a challenge. I have
been through nine elections. I found that in my riding, on the
ground, this was the most bitter and divisive election I have ever
been in, as I have heard from many others. There was an awful lot
of false information out there. When false information is produced
enough times and never challenged, it becomes the truth in some
people's minds. We faced a lot of that during this election cam‐
paign, and it was very bitter.
We have seen divisions across the country as a result of what I
think is false information. There is the simple naming of a bill, Bill
C-69, as the “no-more-pipelines” bill. It is not a no-more-pipelines
bill. There may be some difficulty with it, but from the govern‐
ment's perspective it was a way to deal with environmental issues.
It also gave us the opportunity to put pipelines and other natural re‐
source measures in place without the constant challenge of going to
court further down the road. That was the intent, but the simple
naming of the bill put up a flag in front of many people and it be‐
came divisive. In this Parliament we have to try to get away from
that kind of wording, stick to the facts and try to make this place
operate better.
Let me turn to the first section of the Speech from the Throne,
which talks about fighting climate change:
Canada’s children and grandchildren will judge this generation by its action—or
inaction—on the defining challenge of the time: climate change.
From forest fires and floods to ocean pollution and coastal erosion, Canadians
are living the impact of climate change every day. The science is clear, and it has
been for decades.
I know there is a strong difference of opinion on this, but there is
the scientific community and the so-called experts. We have to be
careful with experts, as they are not always as expert as they think
they are, but the science is that a carbon tax makes sense generally.
The Prime Minister talked about it extensively today. With the car‐
bon tax in place, which is thought to be one of the best solutions to
fight climate change in the world, people on the ground will actual‐
ly do better and we will protect our environment for future genera‐
tions. We have to move there. The fight on the bill on carbon tax
has been fought, and it is wrong for the Leader of the Opposition to
stand in this place with the objective of saying he is basically going
to take the government down.
We have been sent here to do a job, to work together. Let us do
it. Let us deal with the environment and build on our natural re‐
sources in other ways as well.
In our platform we talked about a number of things regarding en‐
vironment and climate protection and building our economy. I want
to name them so that members in the opposition know what we
said. I expect they all have our platform anyway, but they need to
hold the government to account and make sure that we address the
things we said we would as a government. I expect this from my
own party.
We want to make Canada a net-zero emitter by 2050, cut taxes in
half for businesses that produce clean-tech zero-emissions technol‐
ogy, interest-free loans up to $40,000 for homeowners and land‐
lords who want to make their properties more efficient, increase the
amount of ocean and land that is protected to 25% and plant two
billion trees while creating 3,500 jobs a year in doing so. Those are
some of the measures we proposed.
● (1355)
During the election campaign, I stopped at a constituent's place
who had just built what is called a “passive house”. This is one of
the things that we can do. This passive house has walls that are
probably 18 inches thick, or maybe a little thicker, with heavy insu‐
lation and an inner wall and an outer wall. In Prince Edward Island,
which does not exactly have kind winters like the ones in Vancou‐
ver and Victoria, my constituent and his wife will be able to heat
that house for $300 a year because of the way it is built. That shows
what is possible when the right things are done.
I was in another passive house that has been in place for about
six years, and the owners have been heating the 2,000-square-foot
house for $340 a year. The rest of us, who are using oil on the
same-sized house, are probably paying about $6,000 a year and
producing a lot more greenhouse gases. This shows what is possi‐
ble if the government is willing to assist with infrastructure and
housing, which is what Liberals proposed to do in our platform.
64 COMMONS DEBATES December 6, 2019
The Address
It also states in the throne speech that the government will help
to make energy-efficient homes more affordable, introduce mea‐
sures to build clean, efficient and affordable communities and make
it easier for people to choose zero-emission vehicles. That is the
way we have to go to make strides on the climate change issue.
Let me turn to another section of the throne speech. The reason I
quote the throne speech is that we often fail to go back to these doc‐
uments after they are read and really look at what the words say.
We have our own agendas that we want to push, and we have our
own lines that we may want to get on the cameras with and hope
our constituents hear. However, let us delve into what the govern‐
ment is really proposing. With regard to strengthening the middle
class, the throne speech states, “As its first act, the government will
cut taxes for all but the wealthiest Canadians, giving more money
to middle class families and those who need it most.”
What was proposed in the Liberals' platform was to raise the ba‐
sic personal exemption amount to $15,000, which puts more money
in everyone's pockets. Raising that basic exemption level helps a
tremendous percentage of the population. I think the amount
was $12,200 and it will go up to $15,000, so that takes taxes away
from $2,800, which is good for all Canadians.
Liberals are proposing to cut cellphone bills by 25%, and that is
outlined in the throne speech. We are going to try to save small
businesses up to $7,500 by lowering small business taxes from 11%
to 9%, which we started on in the last Parliament. We will make it
easier for Canadians to purchase their first home, by giving them up
to 10% of the purchase price with the first-time home buyer incen‐
tive. Those are some of the things we are proposing to do by taking
actions to strengthen the middle class.
I could also talk about the trade agreements we have signed. I
could talk about some of the things done. When I was on the cam‐
paign trail, I was amazed and shocked at how many people really
did not know about the Canada child benefit, even though it was
coming into their homes. In my riding alone, that amounts to
over $2 million a month that goes directly to families tax-free.
Those are the kinds of initiatives we were able to do in the last Par‐
liament as a government and we need to continue to build on in the
43rd Parliament.
● (1400)
I will not get into this in great detail, but the throne speech goes
on at length about walking the road of reconciliation. There is al‐
ways controversy among people over the reconciliation file with
the indigenous communities. However, and the Prime Minister
mentioned this as well, we have made some strides in this regard.
The indigenous community is the fastest-growing sector of our
population. They are the greatest human resource we have in this
country to prosper for themselves and to prosper for Canadians, to
build our economy, and to build safe communities and homes.
There has been serious trouble in the past caused by governments
and others. We need to work with those communities and build
them to be safe and prosperous communities with their own culture
protected in a way that they can be proud of their history and their
country, and want to work together to move Canada forward for all
Canadians and others around the world.
The other aspect we talk about in the throne speech relates to
pharmacare and some of the health care issues. I want to quote
from the throne speech, because I think it outlines the point. It
states:
Too often, Canadians who fall sick suffer twice: once from becoming ill, and
again from financial hardship caused by the cost of their medications.
The NDP leader mentioned this earlier today.
The throne speech continues:
Given this reality, pharmacare is the key missing piece of universal health care
in this country. The Government will take steps to introduce and implement nation‐
al pharmacare so that Canadians have the drug coverage they need.
It is extremely important for us to get this done. I am sure all of
us who campaigned and knocked on doors met people who could
not afford the pills they needed to get well, or who had other mem‐
bers of their family who were suffering because they were not able
to have the necessary drug care, dental care or other measures to
live healthy lives for their remaining time. Therefore, we need to
get that done. I know that will be a strenuous debate because, as a
government, we have to look at it from the cost side. Governments
also have to look at what the federal and provincial responsibilities
are and how to bring those two together, and how far they can go
with that pharmacare program, whether it will fill in the gaps or go
all the way to a full-out system. That will be a very important de‐
bate.
I see I am nearly out of time so l will close by saying this. In a
former time, I was president of the National Farmers Union. In that
capacity, I was given the opportunity to travel to every region of
this country and live in farmhouses for quite a number of years,
whether in Peace River, B.C., or Ontario. I spent a lot of time in
Saskatchewan and Alberta, some time in Quebec and a lot of time
in the Maritimes. There was one thing we always said within that
movement, which was that when we see the country and understand
the different resources and characters of each region, we have to be
careful not to allow regionalism to set in, as that would divide us
against ourselves. There is always the ability to make this country
stronger than the sum of its parts and that is where we need to go.
● (1405)
Given the makeup of this Parliament, that nobody has a majority,
if we all work together we can make this country stronger than the
sum of its parts. All of us will benefit as a result and, more impor‐
tantly, so will Canadians.
Mr. Dan Albas (Central Okanagan—Similkameen—Nicola,
CPC): Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the member oppo‐
site not only on his maiden speech in this Parliament, as he has giv‐
en a fair number of maiden speeches, and also thank him for his
work as the finance committee chair in the last Parliament. There
was a report on money laundering that had the support of all par‐
ties, so I congratulate him on the work on that.
December 6, 2019 COMMONS DEBATES 65
The Address
However, the member told us to take the promises made by the
government in the last election seriously. The current Minister of
Public Safety and the Minister of Finance showed up in British
Columbia in June promising $68.9 million toward enforcement ac‐
tion on money laundering. B.C. attorney general David Eby said in
September that there are things only Ottawa and federal police offi‐
cers can do.
The monies have not been forthcoming to allow the RCMP to
work with the province to tackle money laundering in my province.
Does he not believe that his government needs to start living up to
the promises it made in the last Parliament before we start talking
about promises made in the last election?
Hon. Wayne Easter: Mr. Speaker, it was a real pleasure to work
with the hon. member on the finance committee as well. We did an
excellent job on the report on money laundering. I believe Attorney
General Eby from the government of B.C. appeared before the
committee, which is who the member speaks of at the moment.
In response to his question, all I can say, and I would say this to
those responsible within the executive council or the cabinet, is let
us get the negotiations done and get the money rolling.
Several people in the cabinet I have talked to have said that the
report on money laundering was a good report. They were pleased
it was an all-committee report and wanted to see it accomplished. I
was told it would be a step-by-step process. Therefore, I would say
to my own crowd, if I could put it that way, to let us get on with the
negotiations; let us get the job done and address the money-laun‐
dering issue head-on.
● (1410)
[Translation]
Mr. Alain Therrien (La Prairie, BQ): Mr. Speaker, this being
my first speech in the House, I would like to acknowledge my con‐
stituents in La Prairie and thank them for putting their trust in me in
the last election.
My colleague from P.E.I. spoke about divisions. He pointed out
that Canada is currently divided, as very different views clash with
each other. For years, the government has been marked by deep
contradictions and has been dragged down by that burden. This
throne speech is no exception. I want to read a paragraph that really
struck me:
And while the Government takes strong action to fight climate change, it will
also work just as hard to get Canadian resources to new markets, and offer unwa‐
vering support to the hardworking women and men in Canada’s natural resources
sectors, many of whom have faced tough times....
We have to make a choice: either fight climate change or export
oil. We are talking about oil here. This is not hockey. We cannot
play along the boards. We have to make a decision. Oil sands de‐
velopment releases more greenhouse gases than the entire province
of Quebec does. Under the Liberals, oil production increased by
more than 20%. We have to make a choice. It has to be clear.
The question is simple. How can we meet targets as ambitious as
the ones the government is proposing without making an effort to
lower the greenhouse gas emissions from oil production?
[English]
Hon. Wayne Easter: Mr. Speaker, I congratulate the member
opposite on his election. I know he comes from the province of
Quebec, and many of the members opposite come from areas where
agriculture is key.
If there was a lesson learned from the CN strike, it was how im‐
portant those natural resources are. We cannot shut them off tomor‐
row or we would shut off the economy. We have to find ways to
balance the environment and the economy. Therefore, we need to
continue to work with the oil and the natural resources industries in
this country and use research and development to bring down, as
we have done a lot, the amount of greenhouse gases produced by
those industries, hopefully using new technology to do better.
Those natural resources, whether we like it or not, are the main‐
stay of our economy and are going to be needed for 30 years or
longer. They create a lot of jobs in this country and we use the ben‐
efits of those resources.
Part of the plan of this government is to use the economy from
those resources and those industries to work on and pay for envi‐
ronmental safeguards and ways of lowering greenhouses gases. It
cannot be all of one and none of the other. We have to find the bal‐
ance. That is the reality of the world that we live in.
They can dream otherwise, but they are dreaming. There is an
old saying: Dream, but do not let dreams be the master. We have to
do both, and that is what this government is trying to accomplish
under our climate action plan and our efforts to build the economy.
Ms. Mumilaaq Qaqqaq (Nunavut, NDP): Mr. Speaker, in
2017, I stood in Centre Block and I talked about suicide in my terri‐
tory. I also called on leaders with power and the ability to make
change. I got tired of waiting, so here I am.
My territory has held the very unfortunate title of having the
highest suicide rate in the country for years. We are looking at basic
human rights. When I am talking to my constituents, that is the first
conversation that comes up.
How do we talk about opportunity and having the option to
thrive and strive, as we should as Canadians, when we do not have
basic human rights? When will the government step up and provide
housing for my constituents to be able to live and feel safe? When
will the government step up and eliminate our boil-water advi‐
sories? When will the government step up and lower living costs so
that people can afford to feed themselves and their families?
This is a conversation that has been going on for decades. I hope
that by the end of this term we can talk about post-secondary op‐
portunities and child care spaces.
66 COMMONS DEBATES December 6, 2019
The Address
The government needs to step up. These are our Canadians.
These are our constituents. This is my riding. These are my people.
These are our people. We need to step up and treat them as Canadi‐
ans, which we all know. We are so proud to be Canadian, but where
are our basic human rights?
● (1415)
Hon. Wayne Easter: Mr. Speaker, I congratulate the member on
her election and getting here. Her voice, as she just stated, is much
needed in the House of Commons and to be heard in the country.
The member mentioned boil-water orders. The government has
made some substantial progress on that but there is a lot further dis‐
tance to go. The Prime Minister himself has stated clearly, in the
actions that were taken in the last Parliament as well as in what was
outlined in the platform and the throne speech, that he has made
this perhaps his most important file.
In this file, he wants to address these difficulties and concerns
and see that indigenous people right across the country gain their
rightful place in this country, with a proper economy and their cul‐
ture, and that they are able to prosper and share their knowledge
and abilities with other Canadians.
Hon. Michelle Rempel Garner (Calgary Nose Hill, CPC): Mr.
Speaker, I want to thank my constituents in the riding Calgary Nose
Hill for giving me a very clear mandate to do one thing: to stand up
for them, fight for them and their voice here in this place.
I received the mandate of over 70%. I went door to door. People
who I know had voted Liberal or NDP in the past looked me in the
eye and we had a serious conversation at the door. They told me
that they had never voted Conservative before, but they were going
to vote for me because it was really bad. They needed me to fight
for them. My way of thanking them is not just saying it here. It is to
do that, to fight for them every day.
To the 98 new members of Parliament in this place, I want to talk
about what it is like at home. I want to talk to them about what it is
like to have 175,000 people who work in the primary industry of
their province suddenly out of work, in a very short period of time.
It is not because of commodity prices, as the Prime Minister so
glibly said this morning. I will get to that. It is because of policies
that were set here.
What we do here reflects on how people live in every part of the
country. What happened in the last Parliament for the people in my
riding meant trauma, suicide, homes lost, jobs lost and families lost.
What we do here matters. I will fight for the people in my riding.
Right now in my province we are seeing some of the highest un‐
employment rates in the country sustained. It is happening and not
because of commodity prices. If it were because of commodity
prices, then why is the United States doing so well with its natural
resource sector? It is because of instability and political decisions
that have made it impossible for the energy sector to sustain em‐
ployment. That is why. It is because of the decisions made here.
In 2017, Alberta's suicide rate was 14.9 per 100,000 people, just
over three points higher than the rest of Canada. That is up really
high. In 2016, there was a project by the Calgary Police Service
called “Operation Northern Spotlight”. It was to help sex workers
in the city. Let me read a story.
A woman who entered the sex trade in 2016, and it has gotten
worse since then, said, “I never thought I would be here. I never
thought I would have to hide from my family, telling them that my
cleaning job runs late every night. I am here because this would
have been an easy $350. I had a great job, then the jobs crisis hit
and I got laid off. Two weeks later, my husband lost his job as well.
The bills did not stop coming.” The problems have not stopped in
my riding.
I will be splitting my time with the member for Battle River—
Crowfoot.
We sit here, and yesterday's throne speech was a slap in the face.
I got scrummed in the media yesterday. I heard, “It was more of a
tone-setting document.” If it were a tone-setting document, it was
tone-deaf for every person in my riding. It did not say anything
about what the government was going to do to reverse the policies
that create the instability that puts the people in my riding out of
work. That needs to change.
If we are not willing to change that, then what is happening in
my province is going to continue to grow. My province is saying it
does not see itself in this country, our country does not have our
back, and asking why it should be part of it. It will continue to fes‐
ter. It is because of the decisions that are being made to put the peo‐
ple in my riding out of work.
People in this place say that it is a dirty industry and that the
province should diversify its way out. Then they go fill up their car
with Saudi oil, while they drink their kale smoothie with its compo‐
nent parts imported from California, while they promote their in‐
dustry, like aerospace, with planes that create greenhouse gas emis‐
sions, or the auto sector, with cars that create greenhouse gas emis‐
sions, or while they go to Walmart and buy a cheap Chinese T-shirt
that is created where there are the some of the highest greenhouse
gas emissions in the world.
● (1420)
They are hypocrites. Anybody who says that the people in my
riding have dirty jobs and do not have the right to work is a hyp‐
ocrite, because nobody is willing to take climate action individually
in this country. They are putting the entire responsibility on the
people in my riding and saying that it is good, that this is what it is
going to take to get this job done, and it will not.
The people in my province have a right to work. They have a
right to prosper. I am sick and tired of this debate. Nothing on cli‐
mate change is happening while my province and the people in it
bear the entire cost and responsibility, and we do nothing. It has to
stop.
December 6, 2019 COMMONS DEBATES 67
The Address
I am going to tell you one thing, Mr. Speaker: It is going to stop
one way or another. One way or another, it is coming to a head.
To everybody in here who thinks that what is happening in my
province is just a separatist movement, just a few fringe people, I
say that it is not just a fringe. People do not feel that they have a
place in this country. They do not feel like they have a fair deal. Do
colleagues know what they see? They see the hypocrisy that I just
mentioned. They see a Prime Minister who fights for jobs with
SNC-Lavalin and stands alleged of bribing Moammar Gadhafi's
son with prostitutes. They see the former fisheries minister signing
special deals over clam fishing that brought him ethics commission
violations. They see scandal after scandal, special deal after special
deal.
Then there are the people who say that people in their riding
have been out of work. In Alberta, there are 175,000 people.
I do not know how many lobster fishers there are in this country,
but when something happens to fisheries, we get angry. We all do
here. We say that we have to fix this. They cannot stay out of work.
When something happens in the auto sector, we do not say that cars
create greenhouse gas emissions and we should just let that industry
die. We do something about it.
When has it become acceptable to let an entire province's indus‐
try die while the rest of the country looks like a hypocrite? It has to
stop. Otherwise, we will face a national unity crisis. We are in one.
I want to let the people in this House know what that looks like.
The premier of my province is rightly talking about a fair deal for
Alberta, and autonomy, and I support him in that.
Here is what Alberta opting out of the CPP looks like. We are the
net contributor to the CPP in the country. Having higher premiums
across the country means that people will not be able to retire until
later ages, and that is because the Prime Minister has put them in
this position.
We need to scrap Bill C-69. We need to scrap Bill C-48 and we
need to understand the wealth that the energy sector creates. It cre‐
ates receptor capacity for clean technology. It displaces energy
from Saudi Arabia and Venezuela and if we are talking about tran‐
sition and climate change, Canadian energy and what my province
does are at the heart of that equation. It should not be killed. Why
would we kill the heart of what Canada can contribute to when it
comes to this?
Enough is enough. I will stand here for however long this Parlia‐
ment lasts. I will stand up for the rights of my province because that
is why I am here. Colleagues stand up and give their thanks for
having been sent here, but I was not sent here to just collect a salary
or stand up and just seal-clap and vote. Constituents sent us here to
fight.
I am going to fight for my province and the people of my riding.
If that means saying we need more autonomy and we need the
equalization payment formula looked at, then I will do that. If ev‐
erybody here says that they will not do that, that they will not give
my province a fair deal, then I am going to tell them right now that
the people in my province are going to say enough is enough. The
choice is for every single person in this House. It starts here and it
ends here.
I implore the people in the House to realize that what was in that
throne speech was not good enough. It is not going to cut it. It is
not going to fix it. It is going to take smart, tough conversations;
otherwise, it is over.
My colleague from Malpeque just made an appeal for unity, and
I want to tell him this: I am not here and the people on this side of
the House are not here to make life politically expedient for the
Liberals in a minority situation. We are here to fight for the people
of our provinces, and our provinces are Alberta, Saskatchewan,
Manitoba, B.C., Ontario, and every part of this country that sees
Alberta as a strong part of Confederation. We will not let this con‐
tinue.
● (1425)
I ask people who are watching today to support me by signing
petition e-2303 at e2303.ca, which would send a message to every
person in the House to do just that. Let us talk about setting a tone.
It is time for Alberta to have a fair deal.
Mr. Kevin Lamoureux (Winnipeg North, Lib.): Mr. Speaker, I
would ask the member where that passion and fight was during the
10 years of Stephen Harper's government, which failed to build one
inch of pipeline to our tidewaters. In fact, when Stephen Harper be‐
came the prime minister, 99-plus per cent of the oil was going via
the United States. When he left office as prime minister, that same
percentage was still there.
Where was the Conservative government when it came to invest‐
ing in western diversification funds? Those members failed to show
up at the table. When we talk about infrastructure and working with
governments to ensure that Alberta and the west got good, solid in‐
frastructure projects and dollars, it was this government that materi‐
alized on that.
However, there is room for us to work collaboratively for the
west. I am a very proud Manitoban. I was in the military when I
served in the province of Alberta. My wife is from Saskatchewan. I
have many family members in Saskatchewan. All of us have some
sort of a connection. I love and care for my country, and I do care
deeply about the west.
Does my colleague from the west agree that it is time to put the
high political partisanship aside and start working for the Prairies
and all Canadians?
68 COMMONS DEBATES December 6, 2019
The Address
● (1430)
Hon. Michelle Rempel Garner: Mr. Speaker, anybody who
lives in my province and watched that knows what it was. I believe
Joe Biden has a tour called “No Malarkey”.
He is the parliament secretary to the House leader, and he knows
that is garbage. That is tone deafness. The last government was his
government. Here is a newsflash. It was not under the Harper gov‐
ernment that we saw this downturn. We built four pipelines. We had
investment coming into the energy sector. Nobody is buying that. I
do not know, maybe those members want this. Maybe they are fin‐
ishing the job that the Prime Minister's father started in the 1980s.
It sure feels like it.
History will hold people to account in this place and this Parlia‐
ment, in a minority situation when we have the type of speech that
the member just had as opposed to doing what is right, good and
just for our entire country.
The Speaker: We are going to have to break until Monday. The
hon. member will have two minutes and 15 seconds coming to her
for questions when we return and take up this debate again.
Accordingly, the House stands adjourned until Monday at
11 a.m. pursuant to Standing Order 24(1).
(The House adjourned at 2:31 p.m.)
CONTENTS
Friday, December 6, 2019
École Polytechnique in Montreal
Mr. Trudeau................................................ 25
Mr. Scheer ................................................. 25
Ms. Larouche .............................................. 26
Mr. Singh .................................................. 27
Mrs. Atwin................................................. 27
The Speaker ............................................... 28
SPEECH FROM THE THRONE
Resumption of debate on Address in Reply
Mr. Scheer ................................................. 28
Amendment................................................ 31
Mr. Lamoureux ............................................ 32
Mr. Angus ................................................. 32
Mr. Manly ................................................. 33
Mr. Trudeau................................................ 33
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS
Violence Against Women
Ms. Bendayan ............................................. 36
Political Co-operation
Mr. Aitchison .............................................. 36
Violence Against Women
Mr. MacKinnon............................................ 36
Violence Against Women
Ms. Chabot ................................................ 37
George Springate
Mr. Scarpaleggia........................................... 37
Harry McWatters
Mr. Albas .................................................. 37
London North Centre
Mr. Fragiskatos ............................................ 37
Jean Leahy
Mr. Easter.................................................. 38
Edmonton Manning
Mr. Aboultaif .............................................. 38
Public Safety
Ms. Sahota (Brampton North)............................. 38
Violence Against Women
Ms. Alleslev ............................................... 38
Violence Against Women
Ms. Gladu.................................................. 38
Climate Change
Ms. Collins ................................................ 39
Claude Béland
Mr. Blanchet ............................................... 39
Violence Against Women
Mrs. Vecchio............................................... 39
Violence Against Women
Ms. Dabrusin .............................................. 39
ORAL QUESTIONS
The Economy
Mr. Scheer ................................................. 40
Mr. Trudeau................................................ 40
Mr. Scheer ................................................. 40
Mr. Trudeau................................................ 40
Mr. Scheer ................................................. 40
Mr. Trudeau................................................ 40
Natural Resources
Mr. Scheer ................................................. 40
Mr. Trudeau................................................ 40
Foreign Affairs
Mr. Scheer ................................................. 40
Mr. Trudeau................................................ 41
Intergovernmental Relations
Mr. Blanchet ............................................... 41
Mr. Trudeau................................................ 41
Mr. Blanchet ............................................... 41
Mr. Trudeau................................................ 41
Pharmacare
Mr. Singh .................................................. 41
Mr. Trudeau................................................ 41
Indigenous Affairs
Mr. Singh .................................................. 41
Mr. Trudeau................................................ 42
Foreign Affairs
Mr. O'Toole ................................................ 42
Mr. Champagne............................................ 42
Mr. Paul-Hus .............................................. 42
Mr. Champagne............................................ 42
Mr. Morantz ............................................... 42
Mr. Champagne............................................ 42
Mr. Kent ................................................... 42
Mr. Champagne............................................ 42
Ms. Alleslev ............................................... 43
Ms. Freeland............................................... 43
Ms. Alleslev ............................................... 43
Ms. Freeland............................................... 43
Health
Mr. Bergeron............................................... 43
Ms. Hajdu.................................................. 43
Mr. Thériault............................................... 43
Ms. Hajdu.................................................. 44
Canada Revenue Agency
Mr. Rayes.................................................. 44
Mrs. Lebouthillier ......................................... 44
Infrastructure
Mr. Rayes.................................................. 44
Ms. McKenna.............................................. 44
Forestry Industry
Mrs. McLeod (Kamloops—Thompson—Cariboo) ....... 44
Ms. Freeland............................................... 44
Natural Resources
Mrs. Stubbs................................................ 44
Mr. Wilkinson ............................................. 45
The Environment
Ms. Qaqqaq................................................ 45
Mr. Wilkinson ............................................. 45
Ms. Ashton ................................................ 45
Mr. Wilkinson ............................................. 45
Women and Gender Equality
Mrs. Mendès............................................... 45
Ms. Monsef ................................................ 45
The Economy
Mr. Poilievre............................................... 46
Mr. Morneau............................................... 46
Mr. Poilievre............................................... 46
Mr. Morneau............................................... 46
Ethics
Mr. Barrett ................................................. 46
Mr. Rodriguez ............................................. 46
Mr. Gourde ................................................ 46
Mr. Rodriguez ............................................. 46
Seniors
Ms. Larouche .............................................. 46
Mrs. Schulte ............................................... 47
Ms. Larouche .............................................. 47
Mrs. Schulte ............................................... 47
International Trade
Mr. Barlow................................................. 47
Ms. Bibeau................................................. 47
Agriculture and Agri-Food
Ms. Rood .................................................. 47
Ms. Bibeau................................................. 47
Mr. Lehoux ................................................ 47
Ms. Bibeau................................................. 47
Natural Resources
Mr. Rogers................................................. 48
Mr. O'Regan ............................................... 48
Telecommunications
Ms. Rempel Garner........................................ 48
Mr. Bains .................................................. 48
Privacy
Mr. Williamson ............................................ 48
Mr. Champagne............................................ 48
National Defence
Mr. Bezan.................................................. 48
Mr. Sajjan.................................................. 48
Post-Secondary Education
Mr. Louis .................................................. 48
Ms. Qualtrough ............................................ 49
Ms. Mathyssen............................................. 49
Ms. Qualtrough ............................................ 49
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS
Parliamentary Budget Officer
The Speaker ............................................... 49
Petitions
Human Organ Trafficking
Mr. Genuis................................................. 49
Violence Against Women
Mrs. Atwin................................................. 49
Homelessness
Mr. Johns .................................................. 49
Veterans Affairs
Mr. Kelly .................................................. 49
Child Welfare
Mr. Julian .................................................. 50
Violence Against Women
Mr. Manly ................................................. 50
SPEECH FROM THE THRONE
Resumption of Debate on Address in Reply
Mr. Trudeau................................................ 50
Mr. O'Toole ................................................ 52
Mr. Blanchet ............................................... 53
Mr. Blanchet ............................................... 54
Amendment to the amendment ............................ 56
Ms. Lambropoulos......................................... 56
Mr. Poilievre............................................... 57
Mr. Boulerice .............................................. 57
Mr. MacKinnon............................................ 58
Mr. Singh .................................................. 58
Mr. Lamoureux ............................................ 61
Mr. Steinley................................................ 61
Mr. Perron ................................................. 62
Mr. Easter.................................................. 62
Mr. Albas .................................................. 64
Mr. Therrien ............................................... 65
Ms. Qaqqaq................................................ 65
Ms. Rempel Garner........................................ 66
Mr. Lamoureux ............................................ 67
Published under the authority of the Speaker of
the House of Commons
Publié en conformité de l’autorité
du Président de la Chambre des communes
SPEAKER’S PERMISSION PERMISSION DU PRÉSIDENT
The proceedings of the House of Commons and its commit‐
tees are hereby made available to provide greater public ac‐
cess. The parliamentary privilege of the House of Commons
to control the publication and broadcast of the proceedings of
the House of Commons and its committees is nonetheless re‐
served. All copyrights therein are also reserved.
Les délibérations de la Chambre des communes et de ses
comités sont mises à la disposition du public pour mieux le
renseigner. La Chambre conserve néanmoins son privilège
parlementaire de contrôler la publication et la diffusion des
délibérations et elle possède tous les droits d’auteur sur
celles-ci.
Reproduction of the proceedings of the House of Commons
and its committees, in whole or in part and in any medium,
is hereby permitted provided that the reproduction is accu‐
rate and is not presented as official. This permission does not
extend to reproduction, distribution or use for commercial
purpose of financial gain. Reproduction or use outside this
permission or without authorization may be treated as copy‐
right infringement in accordance with the Copyright Act. Au‐
thorization may be obtained on written application to the Of‐
fice of the Speaker of the House of Commons.
Il est permis de reproduire les délibérations de la Chambre
et de ses comités, en tout ou en partie, sur n’importe quel sup‐
port, pourvu que la reproduction soit exacte et qu’elle ne soit
pas présentée comme version officielle. Il n’est toutefois pas
permis de reproduire, de distribuer ou d’utiliser les délibéra‐
tions à des fins commerciales visant la réalisation d'un profit
financier. Toute reproduction ou utilisation non permise ou
non formellement autorisée peut être considérée comme une
violation du droit d’auteur aux termes de la Loi sur le droit
d’auteur. Une autorisation formelle peut être obtenue sur
présentation d’une demande écrite au Bureau du Président
de la Chambre des communes.
Reproduction in accordance with this permission does not
constitute publication under the authority of the House of
Commons. The absolute privilege that applies to the proceed‐
ings of the House of Commons does not extend to these per‐
mitted reproductions. Where a reproduction includes briefs
to a committee of the House of Commons, authorization for
reproduction may be required from the authors in accor‐
dance with the Copyright Act.
La reproduction conforme à la présente permission ne con‐
stitue pas une publication sous l’autorité de la Chambre. Le
privilège absolu qui s’applique aux délibérations de la Cham‐
bre ne s’étend pas aux reproductions permises. Lorsqu’une
reproduction comprend des mémoires présentés à un comité
de la Chambre, il peut être nécessaire d’obtenir de leurs au‐
teurs l’autorisation de les reproduire, conformément à la Loi
sur le droit d’auteur.
Nothing in this permission abrogates or derogates from the
privileges, powers, immunities and rights of the House of
Commons and its committees. For greater certainty, this per‐
mission does not affect the prohibition against impeaching or
questioning the proceedings of the House of Commons in
courts or otherwise. The House of Commons retains the right
and privilege to find users in contempt of Parliament if a re‐
production or use is not in accordance with this permission.
La présente permission ne porte pas atteinte aux privilèges,
pouvoirs, immunités et droits de la Chambre et de ses
comités. Il est entendu que cette permission ne touche pas
l’interdiction de contester ou de mettre en cause les délibéra‐
tions de la Chambre devant les tribunaux ou autrement. La
Chambre conserve le droit et le privilège de déclarer l’utilisa‐
teur coupable d’outrage au Parlement lorsque la reproduc‐
tion ou l’utilisation n’est pas conforme à la présente permis‐
sion.
Also available on the House of Commons website at the
following address: https://www.ourcommons.ca
Aussi disponible sur le site Web de la Chambre des
communes à l’adresse suivante :
https://www.noscommunes.ca